Summary
There’s a saying that people don’t leave companies, they leave
managers. Management is a key part of any organization, yet the
discipline is often self-taught and unstructured. Getting to good
solutions for complex management challenges can make the
difference between fulfillment and frustration for teams, and,
ultimately, between the success or failure of companies.
Will Larson’s An Elegant Puzzle orients around the particular
challenges of engineering management—from sizing teams to
managing technical debt to succession planning—and provides a
path to the good solutions. Drawing from his experience at Digg,
Uber, and Stripe, Will Larson has developed a thoughtful approach
to engineering management that leaders of all levels at companies
of all sizes can apply. An Elegant Puzzle balances structured
principles and human-centric thinking to help any leader create
more effective and rewarding organizations for engineers to thrive
in.

Bio
Will Larson has been an engineering leader and software engineer
at technology companies of many shapes and sizes, including
Yahoo!, Digg, SocialCode, Uber, and, since 2016, Stripe.
He grew up in North Carolina, studied Computer Science at Centre
College in Kentucky, spent a year in Japan for the JET Program
teaching English, and has been living in San Francisco since 2009.
An Elegant Puzzle draws from the writing in his blog, Irrational
Exuberance!, that he has been updating since graduating from
college. It is currently, and will always be, a work in progress.
@lethain
www.lethain.com

An Elegant Puzzle: Systems of Engineering Management
© 2019 Will Larson
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or
transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical,
including photocopying, recording, or any other information storage
and retrieval system, without prior permission in writing from the
publisher.
First published in 2019 in hardcover
in the United States of America
by Stripe Press/Stripe Matter Inc.
Stripe Press
Ideas for progress
San Francisco, California
press.stripe.com
Printed in Canada
ISBN: 978-1-7322651-8-9
Ebook by Bright Wing Books (brightwing.ca)
First Edition

Contents
Preface
Acknowledgments
1

Introduction

2 Organizations
2.1

Sizing teams

2.2

Staying on the path to high-performing teams
2.2.1 Four states of a team
2.2.2 System fixes and tactical support
2.2.3 Consolidate your efforts
2.2.4 Durable excellence

2.3

A case against top-down global optimization
2.3.1 Team first
2.3.2 Fixed costs
2.3.3 Slack
2.3.4 Shift scope; rotate

2.4

Productivity in the age of hypergrowth
2.4.1 More engineers, more problems
2.4.2 Systems survive one magnitude of
growth
2.4.3 Ways to manage entropy
2.4.4 Closing thoughts

2.5

Where to stash your organizational risk?

2.6

Succession planning

2.6.1 What do you do?
2.6.2 Close the gaps
3 Tools
3.1

Introduction to systems thinking
3.1.1 Stocks and flows
3.1.2 Developer velocity
3.1.3 Model away

3.2

Product management: exploration, selection,
validation
3.2.1 Problem discovery
3.2.2 Problem selection
3.2.3 Solution validation

3.3

Visions and strategies
3.3.1 Strategies and visions
3.3.2 Strategy
3.3.3 Vision

3.4

Metrics and baselines

3.5

Guiding broad organizational change with
metrics

3.6

Migrations: the sole scalable fix to tech debt
3.6.1 Why migrations matter
3.6.2 Running good migrations

3.7

Running an engineering reorg
3.7.1 Is a reorg the right tool?
3.7.2 Project head count a year out
3.7.3 Manager-to-engineer ratio
3.7.4 Defining teams and groups
3.7.5 Staffing the teams and groups

3.7.6 Commit to moving forward
3.7.7 Roll out the change
3.8

Identify your controls

3.9

Career narratives
3.9.1 Artificial competition
3.9.2 Translating goals

3.10

The briefest of media trainings

3.11

Model, document, and share
3.11.1 How it works
3.11.2 Where it works

3.12

Scaling consistency: designing centralized
decision-making groups
3.12.1 Positive and negative freedoms
3.12.2 Group design
3.12.3 Failure modes

3.13

Presenting to senior leadership

3.14

Time management

3.15

Communities of learning

4 Approaches
4.1

Work the policy, not the exceptions
4.1.1 Good policy is opinionated
4.1.2 Exception debt
4.1.3 Work the policy

4.2

Saying no
4.2.1 Constraints
4.2.2 Velocity
4.2.3 Priorities
4.2.4 Relationships

4.3

Your philosophy of management
4.3.1 An ethical profession
4.3.2 Strong relationships > any problem
4.3.3 People over process
4.3.4 Do the hard thing now
4.3.5 Your company, your team, yourself
4.3.6 Think for yourself

4.4

Managing in the growth plates
4.4.1 In the growth plates
4.4.2 Outside the growth plates
4.4.3 Aligning with values

4.5

Ways engineering managers get stuck

4.6

Partnering with your manager

4.7

Finding managerial scope

4.8

Setting organizational direction
4.8.1 Scarce feedback, vague direction
4.8.2 Mining for direction

4.9

Close out, solve, or delegate

5 Culture
5.1

Opportunity and membership
5.1.1 Opportunity
5.1.2 Membership
5.1.3 Keep going

5.2

Select project leads

5.3

Make your peers your first team

5.4

Consider the team you have for senior positions

5.5

Company culture and managing freedoms

5.6

Kill your heroes, stop doing it harder
5.6.1 The fall and rise of a hero
5.6.2 Kill the hero programmer
5.6.3 A long time coming, a long time going
5.6.4 Resetting broken systems

6 Careers
6.1

Roles over rocket ships, and why hypergrowth is
a weak predictor of personal growth
6.1.1 Your new career narrative
6.1.2 Opportunities for growth

6.2

Running a humane interview process
6.2.1 Be kind
6.2.2 What role is this, anyway?
6.2.3 Finding signal
6.2.4 Be prepared
6.2.5 Deliberately express interest
6.2.6 Feedback loops
6.2.7 Optimize the funnel

6.3

Cold sourcing: hire someone you don’t know
6.3.1 Moving beyond your personal
networks
6.3.2 Your first cold sourcing recipe
6.3.3 Is this high-leverage work?

6.4

Hiring funnel
6.4.1 Funnel fundamentals
6.4.2 Instrument and optimize
6.4.3 Extending the funnel

6.5

Performance management systems
6.5.1 Career ladders

6.5.2 Performance designations
6.5.3 Performance cycles
6.6

Career levels, designation momentum, level
splits, etc.

6.7

Creating specialized roles, like SRE or TPMs
6.7.1 Challenges
6.7.2 Facilitating success
6.7.3 Advantages
6.7.4 What to do?

6.8

Designing an interview loop

7 Appendix
7.1

Tools for operating a growing organization
7.1.1 Line management
7.1.2 Middle management
7.1.3 Managing an organization

7.2

Books I’ve found very useful

7.3

Papers I’ve found very useful

Preface
The first blog post that I ever wrote was on April 7, 2007, and was
titled “Finding Our Programming Flow.” It was not very good. That
year I wrote 69 posts, the last being “Miyajima and Hiroshima,” a
collection of pictures from a trip I took while teaching English in
Japan. The next year, 2008, I wrote 192 posts. The writing still left
much to be desired.
It took 200 more posts and another decade to cobble together a
written voice and to make enough mistakes that my experience
might become worth reading. I’m fortunate that that moment
coincided with my time at Stripe, an environment where folks
routinely do things that might in other contexts seem out of reach:
things like starting a technology magazine or publishing a book.
This book is the lucky alignment of that happy moment at Stripe, a
decade of writing and a decade of learning about both leadership
and management, and the good fortune to work with colleagues
who suggested collecting my writing into this book.
I hope that everyone who picks up this book gets something useful
out of it. Your comments and thoughts are appreciated at:
lethain@gmail.com.

Acknowledgments
A few particular thanks are in order. This book came together in the
months preceding my wedding, and I’m grateful to Laurel for her
thoughts and partnership. Thank you to Brianna Wolfson and Tyler
Thompson, without whom this book would not exist. Finally,
thanks to my sister, Hope, who has long been the talented sibling,
showing that the path to authorship is attainable.

1

CHAPTER 1

Introduction

Introduction
Some people go into management out of a desire to be of service.
Others become managers in a cynical pact, exchanging excitement
in their current role for the prospect of continued salary bumps and
promotions. There are even folks who initially go into management
because they’re entirely fed up with their own manager and are
convinced that they could do better.
I won’t say which of those, if any, describes me.
Regardless of what motivation first brings you into management, it
can feel as if you’ve entered a troubled profession. Skilled
practitioners are scarce, and only the exceptional company is
willing to invest in growing its managers.
If training programs are peculiarly uncommon, concerns that
today’s managers are ill-prepared are not. I was lucky early in my
management career to have a coworker describe me as the best
leader they had worked with. It took several additional years of
practice for another to declare me their worst.
While David’s cloak is increasingly suspicious draped from the
shoulders of Silicon Valley’s Goliaths, the vast majority of
technology companies are well-meaning chrysalises that hope to
one day birth a successful business, and they are guided by
managers who are learning to lead, one unexpected lesson at a
time. For many such people, the entry into engineering

management begins with a crisis, and their training is a series of
hard knocks.
This was certainly my experience: my path into management
began at Digg, paved by a pair of layoffs in 2010. The three one-onones I’d had at my previous job had not, surprisingly, culminated in
a rigorous framework for management, and I had absolutely no
idea what I was doing.
In the years since, I’ve worked to educate myself on the topic,
reading anything that seemed even distantly relevant. There are
some wonderful resources out there (many of which I’ve listed in
the “Books I’ve found very useful” appendix), but the rare answers
I uncovered continued to be drowned out by my ever-increasing
sea of questions.
It was only when I got the opportunity to work at Uber, which was
growing its engineering team from 200 to 2,000 over two years,
and then at Stripe, which was experiencing similar rapid growth,
that I had to opportunity to truly refine my approach to
management through exposure to an endless variety of challenges.
There are few things peaceful about managing in rapidly growing
companies, but I’ve never found anywhere better to learn and to
grow.
As I’ve become more experienced, my appreciation for
management, and engineering management in particular, has
grown, and I’ve come to view the field as a series of elegant,
rewarding, and important puzzles. This book is a collection of
those puzzles, which I’ve had the good fortune to struggle with and
learn from. It starts with the most important tool in my kit,
“Organizations.” Organizational design gets the right people in the

right places, empowers them to make decisions, and then holds
them accountable for their results. Maintained consistently and
changed sparingly, nothing else will help you scale more. Next,
we’ll review a handful of fundamental “Tools” of management that
I’ve found useful across a wide variety of scenarios. These range
from systems thinking to vision documents, from metrics to
migrations, from reorgs to career narratives. Perhaps the easiest
way to use this chapter is to skim over the ideas quickly, and then
reread them when it seems as if they might be useful.
The third chapter, “Approaches,” works through circumstances in
which you might need to adjust how you manage. It digs into how
to adapt your management for rapidly growing companies, and
how to manage when your desired impact is beyond your authority.
It will hopefully help you find alternative paths to approach some of
the areas where you’re not feeling as successful as you’d like.
That chapter is followed by an exploration of “Culture.” This
section is focused on practical things you can do to nurture an
inclusive team or organization. It also digs into a few particular
culture topics on the conflict of “freedom to” and “freedom from,”
and deals with hero culture.
Finally, the book ends with an exploration of “Careers,” with a
focus on interviewing, hiring, and performance management. Many
managers come up thinking of recruiting as something run by
recruiters, and performance management as something designed
by human resources, but these are powerful tools that you should
be using frequently.
If you finish the entire book, you won’t walk into your office the next
day as a perfect manager (I remain grateful for the days I walk into

the office feeling like a marginally competent one), but I hope that
it’ll stimulate questions about how you’re approaching
management, provide a few new approaches for you to experiment
with, and help you take a few steps further down the path of
engineering management.

2

CHAPTER 2

Organizations

Figure 2.1
Sizing teams and groups of teams using sizing rules.

Organizations
An organization is a collection of people working toward a
shared goal. Each organization is an exploration of the possible,
undertaken together by the ten, the hundred, or the thousand.
Initially, I was tempted to glibly write that sometimes
organizations work, but the truly extraordinary thing is that all
organizations work.
Some do indeed work better than others, and organizational
design is the attempt to understand why some create such
energy and others create mostly heat: friction, frustration, and
politics. I believe that excellent organizations grow from
consistently applying a straightforward process.
When I have a problem that I want to solve quickly and cheaply, I
start thinking about process design. A problem I want to solve
permanently and we have time to go slow? That’s a good time to
evolve your culture. However, if process is too weak a force, and
culture too slow, then organizational design lives between those
two.
This chapter covers the approaches to organizational design
and evolution that I’ve found effective. If you’re reading through
and find yourself thinking that this sounds easy, I agree! The
hard bit is keeping your courage up when circumstances get
challenging.

2.1

Sizing teams

When I transitioned from supporting a team to supporting an
organization, I started to encounter a new category of problems
that I had never thought about. How many teams should we have?
Should we create a new team for this initiative, or ask an existing
team to take it on? What is the boundary between these two
teams?
These questions were the gateway to the obscure art of
organizational design. As I’ve gotten more exposure, I’ve come to
believe that the fundamental challenge of organizational design is
sizing teams. You’ll find yourself sizing teams during
reorganizations,1 to accommodate growth from hiring, and when
considering how to support new projects. It’ll be an unusual month
that you won’t consider some aspect of team design.
While I’m skeptical that there exists a unified law of team sizing, I
have iterated my requirements onto a useful framework that solves
the majority of cases I encounter. That framework has in turn led to
a standard playbook. Both are short, opinionated, and hopefully
useful!
The guiding principles I use for sizing teams are:

• Managers should support six to eight
engineers

This gives them enough time for active coaching, coordinating,
and furthering their team’s mission by writing strategies,2 leading
change,3 and so on.
Tech Lead Managers (TLMs). Managers supporting fewer than
four engineers tend to function as TLMs, taking on a share of
design and implementation work. For some folks this role can
uniquely leverage their strengths, but it’s a role with limited career
opportunities. To progress as a manager, they’ll want more time to
focus on developing their management skills. Alternatively, to
progress toward staff engineering roles, they’ll find it difficult to
spend enough time on the technical details.
Coaches. Managers supporting more than eight or nine engineers
typically act as coaches and safety nets for problems. They are too
busy to actively invest in their team or their team’s area of
responsibility. It’s reasonable to ask managers to support larger
teams during the transition to a more stable configuration, but it is
a bad status quo.

• Managers-of-managers should support four
to six managers
This gives them enough time to coach, to align with stakeholders,
and to do a reasonable amount of investment in their organization.
On the other hand, it will also keep them busy enough that they
won’t be tempted to create work for their team.
Ramping up. Managers supporting fewer than four other
managers should be in a period of active learning on either the

problem domain or on transitioning from supporting engineers to
supporting managers. In the steady state, this can lead to folks
feeling underutilized, or being tempted to meddle in daily
operations.
Coaches. Similar to supporting a large team of engineers,
supporting a large team of managers leaves you functioning purely
as a problem-solving coach.

Figure 2.2
A team composed of two working groups, an on-call rotation, and different tenured
engineers.

• On-call rotations want eight engineers
For production on-call responsibilities,4 I’ve found that two-tier
24/7 support requires eight engineers. As teams holding their own
pagers have become increasingly mainstream, this has become an

important sizing constraint, and I try to ensure that every
engineering team’s steady state is eight people.
Shared rotations. It is sometimes necessary to pool multiple
teams together to reach the eight engineers necessary for a 24/7
on-call rotation. This is an effective intermediate step toward
teams owning their own on-call rotations, but it is not a good longterm solution. Most folks find being on-call for components that
they’re unfamiliar with to be disproportionately stressful.

• Small teams (fewer than four members) are
not teams
I’ve sponsored quite a few teams of one or two people, and each
time I’ve regretted it. To repeat: I have regretted it every single
time. An important property of teams is that they abstract the
complexities of the individuals that compose them. Teams with
fewer than four individuals are a sufficiently leaky abstraction that
they function indistinguishably from individuals. To reason about a
small team’s delivery, you’ll have to know about each on-call shift,
vacation, and interruption.
They are also fragile, with one departure easily moving them from
innovation back into toiling to maintain technical debt.
Keep innovation and maintenance together. A frequent practice
is to spin up a new team to innovate while existing teams are
bogged down in maintenance. I’ve historically done this myself,
but I’ve moved toward innovating within existing teams.5 This
requires very deliberate decision-making and some bravery, but in

exchange you’ll get higher morale and a culture of learning, and
will avoid creating a two-tiered class system of innovators and
maintainers.
Fitting together those guiding principles, the playbook that I’ve
developed is surprisingly simple and effective:
Teams should be six to eight during steady state.
To create a new team, grow an existing team to eight to ten,
and then bud into two teams of four or five.
Never create empty teams.
Never leave managers supporting more than eight individuals.
Like all guidelines, this is a structure to aid thinking through sizing
problems, not a straitjacket to restrict every exception. The
context of any situation deserves careful examination, but
increasingly I’ve found that the long-term costs of exceptions
outweigh what I once considered their strengths.

2.2

Staying on the path to highperforming teams

A friend is six months into supporting a 60 person engineering
group. Perhaps unsurprisingly, most of their teams believe that
they have urgent hiring needs. Should my friend spread hiring
equally across the teams in need, or focus hiring on just one or two
teams until their needs are fully staffed? That is the question.
It’s a great question, and captures a deeply challenging aspect of
leading an organization. It’s fun to do initial discovery, learning
from and about everyone. The rare moment when you choose to
reorganize the team6 is painful, but concludes quickly. What’s
much harder is keeping the faith when you’ve played your cards
and need to find space for your plans to come to fruition. Staying
the course is particularly fraught when it comes to growing an
organization, because some teams always need more than you
choose to provide.
When you talk about growing an organization, the conversation
usually leads to hiring. While I believe that hiring is a very
important approach to growing organizations, I also believe that
we reach for it too often. In order to prioritize hiring for scenarios in
which it’ll do the most good, over the past year I’ve developed a
loose framework for reasoning about what a given team needs to
increase performance.

Figure 2.3
Four states of a team.

2.2.1 Four states of a team
The framework starts with a vocabulary for describing teams and
their performance within their surrounding context.
Teams are slotted into a continuum of four states:
A team is falling behind if each week their backlog is longer than
it was the week before. Typically, people are working extremely
hard but not making much progress, morale is low, and your users
are vocally dissatisfied.
A team is treading water if they’re able to get their critical work
done, but are not able to start paying down technical debt or begin
major new projects. Morale is a bit higher, but people are still
working hard, and your users may seem happier because they’ve
learned that asking for help won’t go anywhere.
A team is repaying debt when they’re able to start paying down
technical debt, and are beginning to benefit from the debt
repayment snowball: each piece of debt you repay leads to more
time to repay more debt.

A team is innovating when their technical debt is sustainably low,
morale is high, and the majority of work is satisfying new user
needs.
Teams want to climb from falling behind to innovating, while
entropy drags them backward. Each state requires a different tact.

Figure 2.4
Four stages of a team’s progress, from falling behind to innovating.

2.2.2 System fixes and tactical support
In this framework, teams transition to a new state exclusively by
adopting the appropriate system solution for their current state.
As a manager, your obligation is to identify the correct system
solution for a given transition, initiate that solution, and then

support the team as best you can to create space for the solutions
to work their magic. If you skip to supporting the team tactically
before initiating the correct system solution, you’ll exhaust
yourself with no promise of salvation. For each state, here is the
strategic solution that I’ve found most effective, along with some
ideas about how to support the team while that solution comes to
fruition:
1. When the team is falling behind, the system fix is to hire
more people until the team moves into treading water. Provide
tactical support by setting expectations with users, beating
the drum around the easy wins you can find, and injecting
optimism.
As a caveat, the system fix is to hire net new people, increasing
the overall capacity of the company. Sometimes people
instead attempt to capture more resources from the existing
company, and I’m pretty negative on that. People are not
fungible, and generally folks end up in useful places, so I’m
skeptical of reassigning existing individuals to drive
optimality. By nature, it’s also impossible for this kind of
discussion to not become political, even when everyone
involved has deep trust in and respect for each other.
2. When the team is treading water, the system fix is to
consolidate the team’s efforts to finish more things, and to
reduce concurrent work until they’re able to begin repaying
debt (e.g., limit work in progress). Tactically, the focus here is
on helping people transition from a personal view of
productivity to a team view.
3. When the team is repaying debt, the system fix is to add

time. Everything is already working, you just need to find
space to allow the compounding value of paying down
technical debt to grow. Tactically try to find ways to support
your users while also repaying debt, to avoid disappearing into
technical debt repayment from your users’ perspective.
Especially for a team that started out falling behind and is now
repaying debt, your stakeholders are probably antsy waiting
for the team to start delivering new stuff, and your obligation is
to prevent that impatience from causing a backslide!
4. Innovating is a bit different, because you’ve nominally
reached the end of the continuum, but there is still a system
fix! In this case, it’s to maintain enough slack in your team’s
schedule that the team can build quality into their work,
operate continuously in innovation, and avoid backtracking.
Tactically, ensure that the work your team is doing is valued:
the quickest path out of innovation is to be viewed as a team
that builds science projects, which inevitably leads to the team
being defunded.
I can’t stress enough that these fixes are slow. This is because
systems accumulate months or years of static, and you have to
drain that all away. Conversely, the same properties that make
these fixes slow to fix make them extremely durable once in effect!
The hard part is maintaining faith in your plan—both your faith and
the broader organization’s faith. At some point, you may want to
launder accountability through a reorg, or maybe skip out to a new
job, but if you do that you’re also skipping the part where you get to
learn. Stay the path.

Figure 2.5
Return on investment when consolidating versus spreading investment.

2.2.3 Consolidate your efforts
As an organizational leader, you’ll be dealing with a number of
teams, each of which is in a different place on this continuum.
You’ll also have limited resources to apply, and they’ll usually be
insufficient to simultaneously move every team down the
continuum. Many folks try to move all teams at the same time,
peanut buttering7 their limited resources, but resist that
indecision-framed-as-fairness: it’s not a fair outcome if no one gets
anything.
For each constraint, prioritize one team at a time. If most teams are
falling behind, then hire onto one team until it’s staffed enough to
tread water, and only then move to the next. While this is true for all
constraints, it’s particularly important for hiring.
Adding new individuals to a team disrupts that team’s gelling
process, so I’ve found it much easier to have rapid growth periods
for any given team, followed by consolidation/gelling periods
during which the team gels. The organization will never stop
growing, but each team will.

2.2.4 Durable excellence

This approach to nurturing great organizations is the opposite of a
quick fix. While it’s slow, I’ve found that it consistently leads to
enduring, real improvement in the happiness and throughput of an
organization. Most importantly, these improvements stick around
long enough to compound, creating a durable excellence.

2.3

A case against top-down global
optimization

After I wrote “Staying on the Path to High-Performance Teams,”8
quite a few people asked the same follow-up question: “Once a
team has repaid its technical debt, shouldn’t the now surplus team
members move to other teams?”
This makes a lot of sense, because the team, with so little technical
debt left, is now overstaffed relative to its global priority. Repeated
across many teams, this could lead to an organization having far
too many engineers allocated against last year’s problems, and too
few against today’s.
This is an important problem to address!
First, let me explain why I’m skeptical of reallocating individuals to
address global priority shifts, and then I’ll suggest a couple
alternative approaches to this conundrum.

2.3.1 Team first
Fundamentally, I believe that sustained productivity comes from
high-performing teams, and that disassembling a high-performing
team leads to a significant loss of productivity, even if the members
are fully retained. In this worldview, high-performing teams are
sacred, and I’m quite hesitant to disassemble them.

Teams take a long time to gel. When a group has been working
together for a few years, they understand each other and know how
to set each other up for success in a truly remarkable way. Shifting
individuals across teams can reset the clock on gelling, especially
for teams in the early stages of gelling, and when there are
significant differences in team culture. That’s not to say that you
want teams to never change—that leads to stagnation—but
perhaps preserving a team’s gelled state requires restrained
growth.
Sometimes you will want to grow faster than a gelled team allows,
and that’s okay! The lesson is that you have to account for regelling costs after periods of change, not that you should never
change them. This is part of why my proposed model9
recommends rapidly hiring into teams loaded down by technical
debt, not into innovating teams, which avoids incurring re-gelling
costs on high-performing teams.

2.3.2 Fixed costs
Another reason that I lean away from moving folks off highperforming teams is that most teams have high fixed costs and
relatively small variable costs: moving one person can shift an
innovating team back into falling behind, and now neither team is
doing particularly well. This is especially true on teams responsible
for products and services.
My rule of thumb is that it takes eight engineers on a team to
support a two-tier on-call rotation, so I’m generally reluctant to
move any team with membership below that line. However, fixed

costs come in many other varieties: “keeping the lights on” work,
precommitted contracts, support questions from other teams, etc.
There are some teams with very low fixed costs—a startup without
any users, a team supporting a product that you’ve turned off
entirely—and I suspect that the rules for those teams are different. I
also suspect that such teams are quite uncommon in successful
companies.

2.3.3 Slack
The premise of moving folks to optimize global efficiency also
implies a deeper understanding of how productivity is generated
than I’ve ever personally achieved. I’m a strong believer in not
adding more resources to a team with visible slack, but I’m less
convinced that the inverse applies.
The expected time to complete a new task approaches infinity as a
team’s utilization approaches 100 percent, and most teams have
many dependencies on other teams. Together, these facts mean
you can often slow a team down by shifting resources to it, because
doing so creates new upstream constraints.
In further defense of slack, I find that teams put spare capacity to
great use by improving areas within their aegis, in both incremental
and novel ways. As a bonus, they tend to do these improvements
with minimal coordination costs, such that the local productivity
doesn’t introduce drag on the surrounding system.
Most importantly, “slackful” teams function as an organizational
debugger: you don’t have to consider them when debugging the

overall organizational throughput. I’ve found it much easier to work
a couple constraints at a time, solving forward without needing to
revisit previous constraints.
The Goal by Eliyahu M. Goldratt10 and Thinking in Systems: A
Primer by Donella H. Meadows11 are both phenomenal books on
this topic.

Figure 2.6
Fixed costs of running a team.

2.3.4 Shift scope; rotate
Okay, so what does work? I’ve found it most fruitful to move scope
between teams, preserving the teams themselves. If a team has
significant slack, then incrementally move responsibility to them,
at which point they’ll start locally optimizing their expanded
workload. It’s best to do this slowly to maintain slack in the team,

but if it’s a choice of moving people rapidly or shifting scope
rapidly, I’ve found that the latter is more effective and less
disruptive.
Shifting scope works better than moving people because it avoids
re-gelling costs, and it preserves system behavior. Preserving
behavior keeps your existing mental model intact, and if it doesn’t
work out, you can always revert a workload change with less
disruption than would be caused by a staffing change.
The other approach that I’ve seen work well is to rotate individuals
for a fixed period into an area that needs help. The fixed duration
allows them to retain their identity and membership in their current
team, giving their full focus to helping out, rather than splitting
their focus between performing the work and finding membership
in the new team. This is also a safe way to measure how much slack
the team really has!
A coworker of mine suggested that some companies have very
successfully moved toward the swarming model (at the
organization level, not just at the team level), and I hope that I
eventually get a chance to hear from people who’ve successfully
gone the other direction! One of the most exciting aspects of
organizational design is that there are so many different
approaches that work well.

2.4

Productivity in the age of hypergrowth

You don’t hear the term hypergrowth12 quite as much as you did a
couple years ago. Sure, you might hear it during any given week,
but you also might open up Techmeme and not see it, which is a
monumental return to a kinder, gentler past. (Or perhaps we’re just
unicorning13 now.)
Fortunately for engineering managers everywhere, the challenges
of managing within quickly growing companies still very much
exist.
When I started at Uber, we were almost 1,000 employees and were
doubling the headcount every six months. An old-timer
summarized their experience as: “We’re growing so quickly that
every six months we’re a new company.” A bystander quickly
added a corollary: “Which means our process is always six months
behind our head count.”
Helping my team be successful when a defunct process merges
with a constant influx of new engineers and system load has been
one of the most rewarding opportunities I’ve had in my career. This
is an attempt to explore the challenges and propose some
strategies I’ve seen for mitigating and overcoming them.

2.4.1 More engineers, more problems

All real-world systems have some degree of inherent self-healing
properties: an overloaded database will slow down enough that
someone fixes it, and overwhelmed employees will get slow at
finishing work until someone finds a way to help.
Very few real-world systems have efficient and deliberate selfhealing properties, and this is where things get exciting as you
double engineers and customers year after year after year.

Figure 2.7
Employee growth rate of fast-growing companies.

Productively integrating large numbers of engineers is hard.
Just how challenging this is depends on how quickly you can ramp
engineers up to self-sufficient productivity, but if you’re doubling
every six months and it takes six to twelve months to ramp up, then

you can quickly find a scenario in which untrained engineers
increasingly outnumber the trained engineers, and each trained
engineer is devoting much of their time to training a couple of
newer engineers.
Imagine a scenario in which training a single new engineer takes
about 10 hours per week from each trained engineer, and in which
untrained engineers are one-third as productive as trained
engineers. The result is the right-hand chart’s (admittedly, pretty
worst-case scenario) ratio of two-untrained-to-one-trained.
Worse, for those three people you’re only getting the productivity
of 1.16 trained engineers (2 x .33 for the untrained engineers plus .5
x 1 for the trainer).
You also need to factor in the time spent on hiring.
If you’re trying to double every six months, and about 10 percent of
candidates undergoing phone screens eventually join, then you
need to do ten interviews per existing engineer in that time period,
with each interview taking about two hours to prep, perform, and
debrief.

Figure 2.8
More employees, more customers, more problems.

That’s less than four hours per engineer per month if you can
leverage your entire existing team, but training comes up again
here: if it takes you six months to get the average engineer onto
your interview loop, each trained engineer is now doing three to
four hours of hiring-related work per week, and your trained
engineers are down to approximately 0.4 efficiency. The overall
team is getting 1.06 engineers’ worth of work out of every three
engineers.
It’s not just training and hiring, though:
1. For every additional order of magnitude of engineers, you need
to design and maintain a new layer of management.
2. For every ~10 engineers, you need an additional team, which
requires more coordination.14
3. Each engineer means more commits and deployments per
day, creating load on your development tools.
4. Most outages are caused by deployments, so more
deployments drive more outages, which in turn require
incident management, mitigations, and postmortems.

5. Having more engineers leads to more specialized teams and
systems, which require increasingly small on-call rotations so
that your on-call engineers have enough system context to
debug and resolve production issues. Consequently, relative
time invested in on-call goes up.
Let’s do a bit more handwavy math to factor these in.
Only your trained engineers can go on-call. They’re on-call one
week a month, and are busy about half their time on-call. So that’s
a total impact of five hours per week for your trained engineers,
who are now down to 0.275 efficiency, and your team is now
getting less than the output of a single trained engineer for every
three engineers you’ve hired.
(This is admittedly an unfair comparison because it’s not
accounting for the on-call load on the smaller initial teams, but if
you accept the premise that on-call load grows as engineer head
count grows, and that load grows as the number of rotations
grows, then the conclusion should still roughly hold.)
Although it’s rarely quite this extreme, this is where the oft-raised
concern that “hiring is slowing us down” comes from: at high
enough rates, the marginal added value of hiring gets very slow,
especially if your training process is weak.
Sometimes very low means negative!

2.4.2 Systems survive one magnitude of
growth

We’ve looked a bit at productivity’s tortured relationship with
engineering head count, so now let’s also think a bit about how the
load on your systems is growing.
Understanding the overall impact of increased load comes down to
a few important trends:
1. Most system-implemented systems are designed to support
one to two orders’ magnitude of growth from the current load.
Even systems designed for more growth tend to run into
limitations within one to two orders of magnitude.
2. If your traffic doubles every six months, then your load
increases an order of magnitude every 18 months. (And
sometimes new features or products cause load to increase
much more quickly.)
3. The cardinality of supported systems increases over time as
you add teams, and as “trivial” systems go from unsupported
afterthoughts to focal points for entire teams as the systems
reach scaling plateaus (things like Apache Kafka, mail
delivery, Redis, etc.).
If your company is designing systems to last one order of
magnitude and is doubling every six months, then you’ll have to reimplement every system twice every three years. This creates a
great deal of risk—almost every platform team is working on a
critical scaling project—and can also create a great deal of
resource contention to finish these concurrent rewrites.
However, the real productivity killer is not system rewrites but the
migrations that follow those rewrites. Poorly designed migrations

expand the consequences of this rewrite loop from the individual
teams supporting the systems to the entire surrounding
organization.
If each migration takes a week, each team is eight engineers, and
you’re doing four migrations a year, then you’re losing about 1
percent of your company’s total productivity. If each of those
migrations takes closer to a month, or if they are only possible for
your small cadre of trained engineers—whose time is already
tightly contended for—then the impact becomes far more
pronounced.
There is a lot more that could be said here—companies that mature
rapidly often have tight and urgent deadlines around pursuing
various critical projects, and around moving to multiple data
centers, to active-active designs, and to new international regions
—but I think we’ve covered our bases on how increasing system
load can become a drag on overall engineering throughput.
The real question is, what do we do about any of this?

2.4.3 Ways to manage entropy
My favorite observation from The Phoenix Project by Gene Kim,
Kevin Behr, and George Spafford15 is that you only get value from
projects when they finish: to make progress, above all else, you
must ensure that some of your projects finish.
That might imply that there is an easy solution, but finishing
projects is pretty hard when most of your time is consumed by
other demands.

Let’s tackle hiring first, as hiring and training are often a team’s
biggest time investment.
When your company has decided that it is going to grow, you
cannot stop it from growing, but, on the other hand, you absolutely
can concentrate that growth, such that your teams alternate
between periods of rapid hiring and periods of consolidation and
gelling. Most teams work best when scoped to approximately eight
engineers, as each team gets to that point, you can move the hiring
spigot to another team (or to a new team). As the post-hiring team
gels, eventually the entire group will be trained and able to push
projects forward.
You can do something similar on an individual basis, rotating
engineers off of interviewing periodically to give them time to
recuperate. With high interview loads, you’ll sometimes notice last
year’s solid interviewer giving a poor experience to a candidate or
rejecting every incoming candidate. If your engineer is doing more
than three interviews a week, it is a useful act of mercy to give them
a month off every three or four months.

Figure 2.9
Candidates get offers, become untrained, and then learn.

I have less evidence on how to tackle the training component of
this, but generally you start to see larger companies do major
investments in both new-hire bootcamps and recurring education
classes.
I’m optimistically confident that we’re not entirely cargo-culting
this idea from each other, so it probably works, but I hope to get an
opportunity to spend more time understanding how effective those
programs can be. If you could get training down to four weeks,
imagine how quickly you could hire without overwhelming the
existing team!
The second most effective time thief that I’ve found is ad hoc
interruptions: getting pinged on HipChat or Slack, taps on the
shoulder, alerts from your on-call system, high-volume email lists,
and so on.
The strategy here is to funnel interruptions into an increasingly
small area, and then automate that area as much as possible. Ask
people to file tickets, create chatbots that automate filing tickets,
create a service cookbook, and so on.
With that setup in place, create a rotation for people who are
available to answer questions, and train your team not to answer
other forms of interruptions. This is remarkably uncomfortable
because we want to be helpful humans, but it becomes necessary
as the number of interruptions climbs higher.
One specific tool that I’ve found extremely helpful here is an
ownership registry, which allows you to look up who owns what,
eliminating the frequent “Who owns X?” variety of question. You’ll

need this sort of thing to automate paging the right on-call
rotation, so you might as well get two useful tools out of it!
A similar variant of this is ad hoc meeting requests. The best tool
that I’ve found for this is to block out a few large chunks of time
each week to focus. This can range from telecommuting on
Thursday, to blocking out Monday and Wednesday afternoons, to
blocking out from 8–11 each morning. Experiment a bit and find
something that works well for you.
Finally, the one thing that I’ve found at companies with very few
interruptions and have observed almost nowhere else: really great,
consistently available documentation. It’s probably even harder to
bootstrap documentation into a non-documenting company than it
is to bootstrap unit tests into a non-testing company, but the best
solution to frequent interruptions I’ve seen is a culture of
documentation, documentation reading, and a documentation
search that actually works.
There are a non-zero number of companies that do internal
documentation well, but I’m less sure if there are a non-zero
number of companies with more than 20 engineers that do this
well. If you know any, please let me know so that I can pick their
brains.
In my opinion, probably the most important opportunity is
designing your software to be flexible. I’ve described this as “fail
open and layer policy”; the best system rewrite is the one that
didn’t happen, and if you can avoid baking in arbitrary policy
decisions that will change frequently over time, then you are much
more likely to be able to keep using a system for the long term.

If you’re going to have to rewrite your systems every few years due
to increased scale, let’s avoid any unnecessary rewrites, ya know?
Along these lines, if you can keep your interfaces generic, then you
are able to skip the migration phase of system re-implementation,
which tends to be the longest and trickiest phase, and you can
iterate much more quickly and maintain fewer concurrent versions.
There is absolutely a cost to maintaining this extra layer of
indirection, but if you’ve already rewritten a system twice, take the
time to abstract the interface as part of the third rewrite and thank
yourself later. (By the time you’d do the fourth rewrite, you’d be
dealing with migrating six times as many engineers.)
Finally, a related antipattern is the gatekeeper pattern. Having
humans who perform gatekeeping activities creates very odd
social dynamics, and is rarely a great use of a human’s time. When
at all possible, build systems with sufficient isolation that you can
allow most actions to go forward. And when they do occasionally
fail, make sure that they fail with a limited blast radius.
There are some cases in which gatekeepers are necessary for legal
or compliance reasons, or because a system is deeply frail, but I
think that we should generally treat gatekeeping as a significant
implementation bug rather than as a stability feature to be
emulated.

2.4.4 Closing thoughts
None of the ideas here are instant wins. It’s my sense that
managing rapid growth is more along the lines of stacking small
wins than identifying silver bullets. I have used all of these

techniques, and am using most of them today to some extent or
another, so hopefully they will at least give you a few ideas.
Something that is somewhat ignored a bit here is how to handle
urgent project requests when you’re already underwater with your
existing work and maintenance. The most valuable skill in this
situation is learning to say no in a way that is appropriate to your
company’s culture. That probably deserves its own chapter. There
are probably some companies where saying no is culturally
impossible, and in those places I guess you either learn to say your
noes as yeses, or maybe you find a slightly easier environment to
participate in.
How do you remain productive in times of hypergrowth?

2.5

Where to stash your organizational
risk?

Lately, I’m increasingly hearing folks reference the idea of
organizational debt. This is the organizational sibling of technical
debt, and it represents things like biased interview processes and
inequitable compensation mechanisms. These are systemic
problems that are preventing your organization from reaching its
potential. Like technical debt, these risks linger because they are
never the most pressing problem. Until that one fateful moment
when they are.
Within organizational debt, there is a volatile subset most likely to
come abruptly due, and I call that subset organizational risk. Some
good examples might be a toxic team culture, a toilsome fire drill,
or a struggling leader.
These problems bubble up from your peers, skip-level one-onones,16 and organizational health surveys. If you care and are
listening, these are hard to miss. But they are slow to fix. And, oh,
do they accumulate! The larger and older your organization is, the
more you’ll find perched on your capable shoulders.
How you respond to this is, in my opinion, the core challenge of
leading a large organization. How do you continue to remain
emotionally engaged with the challenges faced by individuals
you’re responsible to help, when their problem is low in your
problems queue? In that moment, do you shrug off the
responsibility, either by changing roles or picking powerlessness?

Hide in indifference? Become so hard on yourself that you collapse
inward?
I’ve tried all of these! They weren’t very satisfying.
What I’ve found most successful is to identify a few areas to
improve, ensure you’re making progress on those, and give
yourself permission to do the rest poorly. Work with your manager
to write this up as an explicit plan and agree on what reasonable
progress looks like. These issues are still stored with your other
bags of risk and responsibility, but you’ve agreed on expectations.
Now you have a set of organizational risks that you’re pretty
confident will get fixed, and then you have all the others: known
problems, likely to go sideways, that you don’t believe you’re able
to address quickly. What do you do about those?
I like to keep them close.
Typically, my organizational philosophy is to stabilize team-byteam and organization-by-organization. Ensuring any given area is
well on the path to health before moving my focus. I try not to push
risks onto teams that are functioning well. You do need to delegate
some risks, but generally I think it’s best to only delegate solvable
risk. If something simply isn’t likely to go well, I think it’s best to
hold the bag yourself. You may be the best suited to manage the
risk, but you’re almost certainly the best positioned to take
responsibility.
As an organizational leader, you’ll always have a portfolio of risk,
and you’ll always be doing very badly at some things that are
important to you. That’s not only okay, it’s unavoidable.

2.6

Succession planning

Two or three years into a role, you may find that your personal rate
of learning has trailed off. You know your team well, the industry
particulars are no longer quite as intimidating, and you have solved
the mystery of getting things done at your company. This can be a
sign to start looking for your next role, but it’s also a great
opportunity to build experience with succession planning.
Succession planning is thinking through how the organization
would function without you, documenting those gaps, and starting
to fill them in. It’s awkward enough to talk about that it doesn’t get
much discussion, but it’s a foundational skill for building an
enduring organization.

2.6.1 What do you do?
The first step in succession planning is to figure out what you do.
This seems like it should be easy, but I’ve found it surprisingly
hard! There are the obvious things you do—one-on-ones,
meetings, head count planning—but you’re probably filling in a
hundred little holes that you don’t even think about.
The approach I’ve taken is to consider your work from several
different angles:

Figure 2.10
Succession planning.

Take a look at your calendar and write down your role in
meetings. This goes for explicit roles, like owning a meeting’s
agenda, and also for more nuanced roles, like being the first
person to champion others’ ideas, or the person who is
diplomatic enough to raise difficult concerns.
Take a second pass on your calendar for non-meeting stuff,
like interviewing and closing candidates.
Look back over the past six months for recurring processes,
like roadmap planning, performance calibrations, or head
count decisions, and document your role17 in each of those
processes.

For each of the individuals you support, in which areas are
your skills and actions most complementary to theirs? How do
you help them? What do they rely on you for? Maybe it’s
authorization, advice navigating the organization, or
experience in the technical domain.
Audit inbound chats and emails for requests and questions
coming your way.
If you keep a to-do list, look at the categories of the work
you’ve completed over the past six months, as well as the stuff
you’ve been wanting to do but keep putting off.
Think through the external relationships that have been
important for you in your current role. What kinds of folks have
been important, and who are the strategic partners that
someone needs to know?
After exploring each of these avenues, you’ll have quite a long list
of things. Test the list on a few folks whom you work closely with
and see if you’ve missed anything. Congratulations, now you know
what your job is!

2.6.2 Close the gaps
Take your list, and for each item try to identify the individuals who
could readily take on that work. Good job, cross those out.
For items without someone who is ready today, identify a handful
of individuals who could potentially take it over. (Depending on the
size of your list, it may be helpful to cluster similar items into
groups to reduce the toil of running this exercise.)

If you’re working at a well-established company, you may find that
there aren’t too many gaps that couldn’t be readily filled by
someone else. However, if you’re at a company going through
hypergrowth,18 it’s common to find that everyone is already
working in the most complex role of their career, and you’ll uncover
gaps, gaping and cavernous.
Filter the gaps down to two lists:
1. The first should cover the easiest gaps to close. Maybe it’ll
require a written document or a quick introduction. You should
be able to close one of these in less than four hours.
2. The latter will be the riskiest gaps. These are the areas where
you’re uniquely valuable to the company, where other folks are
missing skills, and where getting the tasks done is truly
important. You’d expect closing one of these gaps to require
ongoing effort over several months.
Write up a plan to close all of the easy gaps and one or two of the
riskiest gaps. Add it to your personal goals, and then, congrats,
you’ve completed a round of succession planning!
This isn’t a one-time tool, but rather a great exercise to run once a
year to identify things you could be delegating. This helps nurture
an enduring organization, and also frees up time for you to
continue growing into a larger role as well. You can even get a
sense of how well you’re doing by taking a two- or three-week
vacation and seeing what slips through the cracks.
Those items can be the start of next year’s list!

3

CHAPTER 3

Tools

Figure 3.1
System diagram for hiring and training new managers.

Tools
If you ask a manager about their proudest moments, they will
probably tell you a story about helping someone grow. If you ask
that same manager about their most challenging experience,
they will probably talk about a layoff, a reorganization, a shift in
company direction, or the time they weathered an economic
downturn. In management, change is the catalyst of complexity.
The best changes often go unnoticed, moving from one moment
of stability to another, with teams and organizations feeling
stable at every step. The key tools for leading efficient change
are systems thinking, metrics, and vision. When the steps of
change are too wide, teams get destabilized, and gaps open
within them. In those moments, managers create stability by
becoming glue. We step in as product managers, program
managers, recruiters, or salespeople to hold the bits together
until an expert relieves us.
This chapter provides a box of tools for managing change, both
from the abstract chair of guiding change and from the more
visceral role of serving as glue during periods of transition.

3.1

Introduction to systems thinking

Many effective leaders I’ve worked with have the uncanny knack for
working on leveraged1 problems. In some problem domains, the
product management skill set2 is extraordinarily effective for
identifying useful problems, but systems thinking is the most
universally useful tool kit I’ve found.
If you really want a solid grasp on systems thinking fundamentals,
you should read Thinking in Systems: A Primer3 by Donella H.
Meadows, but I’ll do my best to describe some of the basics and to
work through a recent scenario in which I found the systems
thinking approach to be exceptionally useful.

3.1.1 Stocks and flows
The fundamental observation of systems thinking is that the links
between events are often more subtle than they appear. We want
to describe events causally—our managers are too busy because
we’re trying to ship our current project—but few events occur in a
vacuum.

Figure 3.2
System diagram for developer productivity.

Big changes appear to happen in a moment, but if you look closely
underneath the big change, there is usually a slow accumulation of
small changes. In this example, perhaps the managers are busy
because no one hired and trained the managers required to
support this year’s project deadlines. These accumulations are
called stocks, and are the memory of changes over time. A stock
might be the number of trained managers at your company.
Changes to stocks are called flows. These can be either inflows or
outflows. Training a new manager is an inflow, and a trained
manager who departs the company is an outflow. Diagrams in this
chapter represent flows with solid dark lines.
The other relationship, represented in figure 3.1 by a dashed line, is
an information link. This indicates that the value of a stock is a
factor in the size of a flow. The link here shows that the time
available for developing features depends on the number of trained
managers.

Often, a stock outside of a diagram’s scope will be represented as a
cloud, indicating that something complex happened there that
we’re not currently exploring. It’s best practice to label every flow,
and to keep in mind that every flow is a rate, whereas every stock is
a quantity.

3.1.2 Developer velocity
When I started thinking of an example of the usefulness of systems
thinking, one came to mind immediately. Since reading Accelerate:
The Science of Lean Software and DevOp, by Nicole Forsgren,
Gene Kim, and Jez Humble,4 I’ve spent a lot of time pondering the
authors’ definition of velocity.
They focus on four measures of developer velocity:
1. Delivery lead time is the time from the creation of code to its
use in production.
2. Deployment frequency is how often you deploy code.
3. Change fail rate is how frequently changes fail.
4. Time to restore service is the time spent recovering from
defects.
The book uses surveys from tens of thousands of organizations to
assess each one’s overall productivity and show how that
correlates to the organization’s performance on those four
dimensions.

These dimensions kind of intuitively make sense as measures of
productivity, but let’s see if we can model them into a system that
we can use to reason about developer productivity:
Pull requests are converted into ready commits based on our
code review rate.
Ready commits convert into deployed commits at deploy
rate.
Deployed commits convert into incidents at defect rate.
Incidents are remediated into reverted commits at recovery
rate.
Reverted commits are debugged into new pull requests at
debug rate.
Linking these pieces together, we see a feedback loop, in which the
system’s downstream behavior impacts its upstream behavior.
With a sufficiently high defect rate or slow recovery rate, you could
easily see a world where each deploy leaves you even further
behind.
If your model is a good one, opportunities for improvement should
be immediately obvious, which I believe is true in this case.
However, to truly identify where to invest, you need to identify the
true values of these stocks and flows! For example, if you don’t
have a backlog of ready commits, then speeding up your deploy
rate may not be valuable. Likewise, if your defect rate is very low,
then reducing your recovery time will have little impact on the
system.

Creating an arena for quickly testing hypotheses about how things
work, without having to do the underlying work beforehand, is the
aspect of systems thinking that I appreciate most.

3.1.3 Model away
Once you start thinking about systems, you’ll find that it’s hard to
stop. Pretty much any difficult problem is worth trying to represent
as a system, and even without numbers plugged in I find them
powerful thinking aids.
If you do want the full experience, there are relatively few tools out
there to support you. Stella5 is the gold standard, but the price is
quite steep, with a nonacademic license costing more than a new
laptop. The best cheap alternative that I’ve found is Insight
Maker,6 which has some UI quirks but features a donation-based
payment model.

3.2

Product management: exploration,
selection, validation

Most engineering organizations separate engineering and product
leadership into distinct roles. This is usually ideal, not only because
these roles benefit from distinct skills but also because they thrive
on different perspectives and priorities. It’s quite hard to do both
well at the same time.
I’ve met many product managers who are excellent operators, but
few product managers who can operate at a high degree while also
getting deep into their users’ needs. Likewise, I’ve worked with
many engineering managers who ground their work in their users’
needs, but I’ve known few who can fix their attention on those
users when things start getting rocky within their team.

Figure 3.3
Iterative process of product development.

Reality isn’t always accommodating of this ideal setup. Maybe your
team’s product manager leaves or a new team is being formed,7
and you, as an engineering leader, need to cover both roles for a
few months. This can be exciting, and, yes this can be a time when
“exciting” rhymes with “terrifying.”
Product management is a deep profession, and mastery requires
years of practice, but I’ve developed a simple framework to use
8

when I’ve found myself fulfilling product management8
responsibilities for a team. It’s not perfect, but hopefully it’ll be
useful for you as well.
Product management is an iterative elimination tournament, with
each round consisting of problem discovery, problem selection,
and solution validation. Problem discovery is uncovering possible
problems to work on, problem selection is filtering those problems
down to a viable subset, and solution validation is ensuring that
your approach to solving those problems works as cheaply as
possible.
If you do a good job at all three phases, you win the luxury of doing
it all again, this time with more complexity and scope. If you don’t
do well, you end up forfeiting or being asked to leave the game.9

3.2.1 Problem discovery
The first phase of a planning cycle is exploring the different
problems that you could pick to solve. It’s surprisingly common to
skip this phase, but that, unsurprisingly, leads to inertia-driven
local optimization. Taking the time to evaluate which problem to
solve is one of the best predictors I’ve found of a team’s long-term
performance.
The themes that I’ve found useful for populating the problem space
are:
Users’ pain. What are the problems that your users experience?
It’s useful to go broad via survey mechanisms, as well as to go deep

by interviewing a smaller set of interesting individuals across
different user segments.
Users’ purpose. What motivates your users to engage with your
systems? How can you better enable users to accomplish their
goals?
Benchmark. Look at how your company compares to competitors
in the same and similar industries. Are there areas in which you are
quite weak? Those are areas to consider investing in. Sometimes
folks keep to a narrow lens when benchmarking, but I’ve found that
you learn the most interesting things by considering both fairly
similar and rather different companies.
Cohorts. What is hiding behind your clean distributions? Exploring
your data for the cohorts hidden behind top-level analysis is an
effective way to discover new kinds of users with surprising needs.
Competitive advantages. By understanding the areas you’re
exceptionally strong in, you can identify opportunities that you’re
better positioned to fill than other companies.
Competitive moats. Moats are a more extreme version of a
competitive advantage. Moats represent a sustaining competitive
advantage, which makes it possible for you to pursue offerings that
others simply cannot. It’s useful to consider moats in three
different ways:
What do your existing moats enable you to do today?
What are the potential moats you could build for the future?
What moats are your competitors luxuriating behind?

Compounding leverage. What are the composable blocks you
could start building today that would compound into major product
or technical leverage10 over time? I think of this category of work as
finding ways to get the benefit at least twice. These are potentially
tasks that initially don’t seem important enough to prioritize, but
whose compounding value makes the work possible to prioritize.
A design example might be introducing to an application a new
navigation scheme that better supports the expanded set of
actions and modes you have today, and that will support future
proliferation as well. (Bonus points if it manages to prevent
future arguments about the positioning of new actions relative
to existing ones!)
An infrastructure example might be moving a failing piece of
technology to a new standard. This addresses a reliability
issue, lowers maintenance costs, and also reduces the costs of
future migrations.11

3.2.2 Problem selection
Once you’ve identified enough possible problems, the next
challenge is to narrow down to a specific problem portfolio. Some
of the aspects that I’ve found useful to consider during this phase
are:
Surviving the round. Thinking back to the iterative elimination
tournament, what do you need to do to survive the current round?
This might be the revenue that the product will need to generate to
avoid getting canceled, adoption, etc.

Surviving the next round. Where do you need to be when the next
round in order to avoid getting eliminated then? There are a
number of ways (many of them revolving around quality trade-offs)
to reduce long-term throughput in favor of short-term velocity.
(Conversely, winning leads to significantly more resources later, so
that trade-off is appropriate sometimes!)
Winning rounds. It’s important to survive every round, but it’s
also important to eventually win a round! What work would ensure
that you’re trending toward winning a round?
Consider different time frames. When folks disagree about which
problems to work on, I find that the conflict is most frequently
rooted in different assumptions about the correct time frame to
optimize for. What would you do if your company was going to run
out of money in six months? What if there were no external factors
forcing you to show results until two years out? Five years out?
Industry trends. Where do you think the industry is moving, and
what work will position you to take advantage of those trends, or to
at least avoid having to redo the work in the near future?
Return on investment. Personally, I think people often underprioritize quick, easy wins. If you’re in the uncommon position of
understanding both the impact and costs of doing small projects,
then take time to try ordering problems by expected return on
investment. At this phase, you’re unlikely to know the exact
solution, so figuring out cost is tricky, but for categories of
problems that you’ve seen before you can probably make a solid
guess. (If you don’t personally have relevant experience, ask
around.) Particularly in cases where wins are compounding, they
may be surprisingly valuable over the medium and long term.

Experiments to learn. What could you learn now that would make
problem selection in the future much easier?

3.2.3 Solution validation
Once you’ve narrowed down the problem you want to solve, it’s
easy to jump directly into execution, but that can make it easy to
fall in love with a difficult approach. Instead, I’ve found that it’s well
worth it to take the risk out of your approach with an explicit
solution validation phase.
The elements that I’ve found effective for solution validation are:
Write a customer letter. Write the launch announcement that you
would send after finishing the solution. Are you able to write
something exciting, useful, and real? It’s much more useful to test
it against your actual users than to rely on your intuition.
Identify prior art. How do peers across the industry approach this
problem? The fact that others have solved a problem in a certain
way doesn’t mean that it’s a great way, but it does at least mean
it’s possible. A mild caveat: it’s better to rely on people you have
some connection to instead of on conference talks and such, since
there is a surprisingly large amount of misinformation out there.
Find reference users. Can you find users who are willing to be the
first users for the solution? If you can’t, you should be skeptical
whether what you’re building is worthwhile.

Prefer experimentation over analysis. It’s far more reliable to
get good at cheap validation than it is to get great at consistently
picking the right solution. Even if you’re brilliant, you are almost
always missing essential information when you begin designing.
Analysis can often uncover missing information, but it depends on
knowing where to look, whereas experimentation allows you to find
problems that you didn’t anticipate.
Find the path more quickly traveled. The most expensive way to
validate a solution is to build it in its entirety. The upside of that
approach is that you’ve lost no time if you picked a good solution.
The downside is that you’ve sacrificed a huge amount of time if it’s
not. Try to find the cheapest way to validate.
Justify switching costs. What will the costs of switching be for
users who move to your solution? Even if folks want to use it, high
switching costs may mean that they simply won’t be able to. Test
with your potential users if they’d be willing to pay the full cost of
migrating to your solution instead of their existing planned work.
As an aside, I’ve found that most aspects of running a successful
technology migration12 overlap with good solution validation! This
is a very general skill that will repay many times over the time you
invest in learning it.
Putting these three elements in place today—exploration,
selection, and validation—won’t make you an exceptional product
manager overnight, but they will provide a solid starting place to
develop those skills and perspective for the next time you find
yourself donning the product manager hat.

3.3

Visions and strategies

As an organization grows beyond 50 people or so, you’ll feel a
building pressure to add a third layer of management, and
eventually you will. This ought to be a benign event: What’s the
difference between supporting some managers and supporting
their managers? It shouldn’t be too different, but for me it was
when my previous mechanisms of alignment stopped working very
well.
Where I was once partnering with teams on their project roadmaps,
now I found myself increasingly surprised by the projects that they
were working on. Where I was once debating different approaches
with the teams, now that conversation was happening in rooms I
didn’t have time to join.
My first instinct was to dive in and understand each instance, but
that, unsurprisingly, wasn’t a very scalable solution. My second
instinct was to design a series of “operating reviews” in which we
periodically reviewed metrics and major projects. While those were
useful in their own right, they proved more effective for learning
and fine-tuning than for broad alignment. Being out of alignment
for a quarter is just so much uncaptured potential.
What I needed was a way to coordinate my approach across teams,
both in terms of very specific challenges and in terms of our longterm direction. After experimenting with a handful of different
approaches, agreeing on strategy and vision has been the most
effective approach that I’ve found to alignment at scale.

3.3.1 Strategies and visions
Strategies are grounded documents which explain the trade-offs
and actions that will be taken to address a specific challenge.
Visions are aspirational documents that enable individuals who
don’t work closely together to make decisions that fit together
cleanly.
Picking the right format for your needs is important, but the most
important thing is probably to give both a try and get a feel for
them! These are peculiar genres of literature that take some
practice to master. It’s taken me years to get comfortable writing
visions, and it was only when I started to support teams with
seemingly incompatible ideologies that these documents value
became clear. The same goes for writing strategies: it took a long
time and skeptical study of several strategy books before what I
wrote started to come together into a useful artifact.
With that said, it’s time to dig into how to write strategies first, and
then visions.

Figure 3.4
Table of differences between strategy and vision.

3.3.2 Strategy
A strategy recommends specific actions that address a given
challenge’s constraints. A structure that I’ve found extremely
effective13 is described in Good Strategy/Bad Strategy by Richard
Rumelt,14 and has three sections: diagnosis, policies, and actions.
The diagnosis is a theory describing the challenge at hand. It calls
out the factors and constraints that define the challenge, and at its
core is a very thorough problem statement. An example of a simple
diagnosis might be “I am too busy to think about long-term goals. I
attend 35 hours of meetings each week. I am under pressure to
immediately increase team performance. I believe that if I stop
doing my current meetings, short-term team performance will

decrease. I am concerned that if my short-term team performance
decreases, I may lose face as an effective leader, which will
undermine my career opportunities. I believe that if I don’t think
about long-term goals, our performance will never improve, which
will also undermine my career opportunities.” Before you’ve even
finished reading a great diagnosis, you’ll often have identified
several good candidate approaches. That’s the power of a welldefined problem statement, and why it’s an important foundational
element for your strategy.
The second step is to identify policies that you will apply to address
the challenge. These describe the general approach that you’ll
take, and are often trade-offs between two competing goals.
Continuing the above example, you might choose to allow shortterm performance to dip in order to invest into long-term
performance, combined with a policy of proactive expectationsetting with your stakeholders. Conversely, you might choose to
take a hill-climbing approach to long-term performance, with
iterative short-term improvement leading to improved long-term
performance. Both are valid guiding policies, and both embrace the
reality that you have limited resources to invest. When you read
bad guiding policies, you think, “so what?” because its found a way
to justify entrenching the status quo. When you read good guiding
policies, you think, “Ah, that’s really going to annoy Anna, Bill, and
Claire,” because the approach takes a clear stance on competing
goals.
When you apply your guiding policies to your diagnosis, you get
your actions. Folks are often comfortable with hard decisions in the
abstract, but struggle to translate policies into the specific steps to
implement them. This is typically the easiest part to write, but

publishing it and following through with it can be a significant test
of your commitment. In the example above, your specific actions
might be to stop attending weekly team meetings in order to free
up time and move to a monthly metrics review, combined with
blocked-out focus hours that you unapologetically shelter. When
you read good, coherent actions, you think, “This is going to be
uncomfortable, but I think it can work.” When you read bad ones,
you think, “Ah, we got afraid of the consequences, and we aren’t
really changing anything.”
Because strategies are specific to a given problem, it’s okay—and
even encouraged—to write quite a few of them. Over the past year,
I’ve worked with people on strategies for how we partner with other
teams, how we manage end-to-end API latency, and how we
manage infrastructure costs.15 I’ve also peered over others’
shoulders as they worked on quite a few more ideas. The act of
writing a strategy leads folks through a systematic analysis, so,
even if we don’t share them, writing these documents helps us
work through quite a few challenges, both overwhelming and
mundane.
People sometimes describe strategy as artful or sophisticated, but
I’ve found that the hardest part of writing a good strategy is pretty
mundane. You must be honest about the constraints that are
making the challenge difficult, which almost always include people
and organizational aspects that are uncomfortable to
acknowledge. No extent of artistry can solve a problem that you’re
unwilling to admit.

3.3.3 Vision

If strategies describe the harsh trade-offs necessary to overcome a
particular challenge, then visions describe a future in which those
trade-offs are no longer mutually exclusive. An effective vision
helps folks think beyond the constraints of their local maxima, and
lightly aligns progress without requiring tight centralized
coordination.
You should be writing from a place far enough out that the error
bars of uncertainty are indisputably broad, where you can focus on
the concepts and not the particulars. Visions should be detailed,
but the details are used to illustrate the dream vividly, not to
prescriptively constrain its possibilities.
A good vision is composed of:
1. Vision statement: A one- or two-sentence aspirational
statement to summarize the rest of the document. This is your
core speaking point, which you will repeat at each meeting,
planning period, and strategy review. It shouldn’t try to
capture every detail of your vision, but it does need to
memorably evoke your vision effectively.
2. Value proposition: How will you be valuable to your users and
to your company? What kinds of success will you enable them
to achieve? There is a sequencing question of whether you
should start with capabilities (the next bullet) and reason into
value proposition or do the opposite, but I’ve found that
starting from your users leads to visions that are both more
ambitious and more grounded.
3. Capabilities: What capabilities will the product, platform, or
team need in order to deliver on your value proposition? Will it

need to support multiple independent business lines? Will it
need to deliver against the disparate needs of several distinct
customer cohorts?
4. Solved constraints: What are the constraints that you’re
limited by today, but that in the future you’ll no longer be
constrained by? For example, if you’re currently “spending
into” developer velocity, perhaps in the future you’ll be able to
achieve significant developer velocity while also maintaining
low costs.
5. Future constraints: What are the constraints that you expect
to encounter in this wonderful future? Hopefully, these new
constraints will be things that are easy to adjust, like funding
or hiring.
6. Reference materials: Link all the existing plans, metrics,
updates, references, and documents into an appendix for
those who want to understand more of the thinking that went
into the vision. This allows you to shed complexity from your
vision document without sacrificing context.
7. Narrative: Once you’ve written the previous sections, the last
step of writing a compelling vision is to synthesize all those
details into a short—maybe one-page—narrative that serves
as an easy-to-digest summary. In your final document, this is
probably the second section, following the statement.
Put all these pieces together, and you’ve crafted a document that
is a guiding hand to align decisions yet still creates room for teams
to make their own choices and trade-offs along the way. You’ll
know a vision is succeeding when people reference the document

to make their own decisions, and you’ll know it’s struggling when
decisions keep happening that don’t fit into its direction.
Compared to strategies, there is more room to play with the vision
format. You’ll be reading far fewer visions than strategies, so
consistency is less important. Play with the content a bit to find
what works best for you.
A few additional tips that I’ve found especially useful:
Test the document! This is a core leadership tool, and your first
version will almost certainly be bad. Write a draft, sit down with a
few different folks to get their perspectives, then iterate. Keep
doing this until you’ve synthesized feedback. If there is feedback
you disagree with, embrace the vision as an opportunity to address
conflict by explicitly acknowledging disagreements within the
vision text.
Refresh periodically. Take some time every year to refresh the
vision, and prefer usefulness over consistency. If your old vision
doesn’t resonate, it’s okay to start over: it’s a sign that you’ve
learned a lot over the past year.
Use present tense. This makes the writing impactful and concise,
and conveys a sense of confidence about the future.
Write simply. Often, visions are saturated with buzzwords, which
turns readers off.
You’ll likely want one vision for every complete distinct area, but no
more. If areas overlap, you get the alignment value from having one

unified vision; having two clearly articulated visions in one place is
worse than having zero.
Like other leadership tools, a vision or strategy document is a
solution to a specific set of problems, and it’s not always useful. If
your team is aligned and doing good work, time spent writing these
probably won’t be too valuable.
However, if your team is struggling to align with stakeholders, or if
you’re struggling to lead a cohesive organization, these documents
are exceptionally useful, fairly quick to write as you gain practice,
and low risk (at worst, they get ignored).

3.4

Metrics and baselines

There is a moment in every company’s growth when top-level
planning shifts from discussing specific projects to talking about
goals. This happens recursively across each scope of leadership,
as areas of accountability become too broad or complex for their
leaders to consistently understand every project’s details.
This can be a very empowering moment because goals decouple
the “what” from the “how,” but it can also be a confusing transition
for everyone involved: writing clear goals takes a bit of practice.

• Defining goals
Bad goals are indistinguishable from numbers. “Our p50 build time
will be below two seconds,” or “We’ll finish eight large projects.”
You’ll know a goal is just a number when you read it and aren’t sure
if it’s ambitious or whether it matters.
Good goals are a composition of four specific kinds of numbers:
1. A target states where you want to reach.
2. A baseline identifies where you are today.
3. A trend describes the current velocity.
4. A time frame sets bounds for the change.

Put these all together, and a well-structured goal takes the form of:
“In Q3, we will reduce time to render our frontpage from 600ms
(p95) to 300ms (p95). In Q2, render time increased from 500ms to
600ms.”
The two tests of an effective goal are whether someone who
doesn’t know much about an area can get a feel for a goal’s degree
of difficulty, and whether afterward they can evaluate if it was
successfully achieved. If you define all four aspects, typically your
goal will fulfill both criteria.

• Investments and baselines
There are two particularly interesting kinds of goals: investments
and baselines. Investments describe a future state that you want to
reach, and baselines describe aspects of the present that you want
to preserve.
Imagine that you wanted to speed up your data pipeline. Your goal
might be, “Core batch jobs should finish within three hours (p95)
by the end of Q3. They currently take six hours (p95), and over the
course of Q2 they got two hours slower.” This is a well-structured
goal, but it’s also incomplete because you could likely reach that
goal tomorrow by doubling the size of your cluster, which is
probably not a desirable outcome.
The best way to avoid such unintended outcomes is to pair your
investment goals with baseline metrics, sometimes referred to as
countervailing metrics. For the data pipeline example, a few of the
baseline metrics might be:

Efficiency of running core batch jobs should not exceed
current price of $0.05 per GB.
Core batch jobs should not increase alert load on teams
operating or using the pipeline, which are currently alerting
twice per week.
Baseline metrics are useful for narrowing the solution space that
you explore in order to accomplish your investment goals. They are
also useful for identifying when you should pause pursuing your
goals and instead invest in platform quality. For example, if you
were making excellent progress toward launching a new feature
but site stability has regressed below your baselines, this
framework provides a structure to trigger rebalancing your
priorities.
Although your baselines will often be about preserving a current
property, you can also decide to accept some degradation before
you want to trigger reprioritization. Perhaps you’re okay with costs
increasing by 10 percent as long as your investment goals are
accomplished. This kind of upfront clarity around trade-offs can be
quite powerful.

• Plans and contracts
The most common way to use goals is during a planning process.
By agreeing on the mix of investment and baseline goals for each
team, you’re able to set clear expectations for a team while still
giving them full ownership of how they’ll satisfy the constraints.
I’ve found that you should specify as few investment goals as

possible, maybe three, and that those should be the focus of
planning discussions.
You’ll probably want to identify more baseline goals than
investment goals, but it’s easiest to separate them out to avoid
bogging down the conversation. Ideally, baselines are carried over
across planning periods, such that they frame the investment goals
but don’t require too much active discussion during any given
planning cycle.
One potential exception is when you’re using a baseline as a
contract with a second party, possibly specifying an SLO,16 at
which point you’ll probably want to discuss it more explicitly than
other baselines: missing an SLO will probably require immediate
reprioritization, whereas missing most other baselines can
generally be addressed more methodically.
From OKRs17 onward, there are dozens of different approaches to
setting metrics, but I’ve found this format to be a useful,
lightweight structure to start from. If folks have found other
approaches easier or more useful, I’d love to hear from you!

3.5

Guiding broad organizational change
with metrics

Although people often talk about goals and metrics18 when they’re
writing new plans or reflecting on past plans, my fondest memories
of metrics are when I’ve seen them used to drive large
organizational change. In particular, I’ve found metrics to be an
extremely effective way to lead change with little or no
organizational authority, and I wanted to write up how I’ve seen
that work.
At both Stripe and Uber, I’ve had the opportunity to manage
infrastructure costs. (Let me insert a plug for Ryan Lopopolo’s
amazing blog post on “Effectively Using AWS Reserved
Instances.”19) Folks who haven’t thought about this problem often
default to viewing it as boring, but I’ve found that as you dig into it,
it’s rich soil for learning about leading organizational change.
It’s also a good example of how to lead change with metrics!
Infrastructure cost is a great example of a baseline metric.20 When
you’re asked to take responsibility for a company’s overall
infrastructure costs, you’re going to start from a goal along the
lines of “Maintain infrastructure costs at their current percentage
of net revenue of 30 percent.” (That percentage is a fictional
number for this example’s purposes, since the percentage will
depend on your industry and maturity, but I have found that tying it

against net revenue is more useful than pinning it at a specific
dollar amount.)
From there, the approach that I’ve found effective is:
1. Explore: The first step is to get data in an explorable format in
your data warehouse, an SQL database, or even an Excel
spreadsheet. Once there, spend time looking through it and
getting a feel for it. Your goal in this phase is to identify where
the levers for change are. For example, you might find that
your batch pipeline is the majority of your costs and that your
data warehouse is surprisingly cheap, which will allow you to
focus further efforts.
2. Dive: Once you know the three or four major contributors, go
deep on understanding those areas and the levers that drive
them. Batch costs might be sensitive to number of jobs, total
data stored, or new product development, or it might be
entirely driven by a couple of expensive jobs. Diving deep
helps you build a mental model, and it also kicks off a
relationship between you and the teams who you’ll want to
partner with most closely.
3. Attribute: For most company-level metrics (cost, latency,
development velocity, etc.), the first step of diving will uncover
one team who are nominally accountable for the metric’s
performance, but they are typically a cloak. When you pull that
cloak aside, that team’s performance is actually driven by
dozens of other teams. For example, you might have a Cloud
engineering team who are accountable for provisioning VMs,
but they’re not the folks writing the code that runs on those
VMs. It’s easy to simply pass the cost metric on to that Cloud

team, but that’s just abdicating responsibility to them. What’s
more useful is to help them build a system of second-degree
attribution, allowing you to build data around the teams using
the platform. This second degree of attribution is going to
allow you to target the folks who can make an impact in the
next step.
4. Contextualize: Armed with the attribution data, start to build
context around each team’s performance. The most general
and self-managing tool for this is benchmarking. It’s one thing
for a team to know that they’re spending $100,000 a month,
and it’s something entirely different for them to know that
they’re spending $100,000 a month and that their team
spends the second-highest amount out of 47 teams.
Benchmarking is particularly powerful because it automatically
adapts to changes in behavior. In some cases, benchmarking
against all teams might be too coarse, and it may be useful to
benchmark against a small handful of cohorts. For example,
you might want to define cohorts for front-end, back-end, and
infrastructure teams, given that they’ll have very different cost
profiles.
5. Nudge: Once you’ve built context around the data so that folks
can interpret it, the next step is to start nudging them to
action! Dashboards are very powerful for analysis, but the
challenge for baseline metrics is that folks shouldn’t need to
think about them the vast majority of the time, and that can
lead to them forgetting about the baselines entirely. What I’ve
found effective is to send push notifications, typically email, to
teams whose metric has changed recently, both in terms of
absolute change and in terms of their benchmarked

performance against their cohort. This ensures that each time
you push information to a team, it includes important
information that they should act on! What’s so powerful about
nudges is that simply letting folks know their behavior has
changed will typically stir them to action, and it doesn’t require
any sort of organizational authority to do so. (For more on this
topic, take a look at Nudge by Richard H. Thaler and Cass R.
Sunstein.)21
6. Baseline: In the best case, you’ll be able to drive the
organizational impact you need with contextualized nudges,
but in some cases that isn’t quite enough. The next step is to
work with the key teams to agree on baseline metrics for their
performance. This is useful because it ensures that the
baselines are top-of-mind, and it also gives them a powerful
tool for negotiating priorities with their stakeholders. In some
cases, this does require some organizational authority, but I’ve
found that folks universally want to be responsible. As long as
you can find time to sit down with the key teams and explain
why the goal is important, it typically doesn’t require much
organizational authority.
7. Review: The final phase, which hopefully you won’t need to
reach, is running a monthly or quarterly review that looks at
each team’s performance, and reaching out to teams to
advocate for prioritization if they aren’t sustaining their
agreed-upon baselines. This typically requires an executive
sponsor, because teams who aren’t hitting their baselines are
almost always being prioritized against other goals, and they
your help explaining to their stakeholders why the change is
important.

I’ve seen this approach work and, more importantly, I’ve found it to
be very scalable. It enables a company to concurrently maintain
many baseline metrics without overloading its teams. This is
largely because this approach focuses on driving targeted change
within the key drivers, only requiring involvement from a small
subset of teams for any given metric. The approach is also effective
because it tries to minimize top-down orchestration in favor of
providing information to encourage teams themselves to adjust
priorities.

3.6

Migrations: the sole scalable fix to tech
debt

The most interesting migration I ever participated in was Uber’s
migration from Puppet-managed services to a fully self-service
provisioning model in which any engineer at the company could
spin up a new service in two clicks. Not only could they, they did,
provisioning multiple services each day by the time the service was
complete, and every newly hired engineer could spin up a service
from scratch on their first day.

Figure 3.5
Stages of a technical migration.

What made this migration so interesting was the volume. When we
started, provisioning a new service took about two weeks of clock
time and about two days of engineering time, and we were falling
further behind each day. At the time, this was more than just a little

stressful, but it was also a perfect laboratory to learn how to run
large-scale software migrations: the transition was large enough to
see even small shifts, and long enough that we got to experiment
with a number of approaches.
Migrations are both essential and frustratingly frequent as your
codebase ages and your business grows: most tools and processes
only support about one order of magnitude of growth22 before
becoming ineffective, so rapid growth makes migrations a way of
life. This isn’t because you have bad processes or poor tools—
quite the opposite. The fact that something stops working at
significantly increased scale is a sign that it was designed
appropriately to the previous constraints rather than being overdesigned.23
As a result, you switch tools a lot, and your ability to migrate to new
software can easily become the defining constraint for your overall
velocity. Given their importance, we don’t talk about running
migrations very often; let’s remedy that!

3.6.1 Why migrations matter
Migrations matter because they are usually the only available
avenue to make meaningful progress on technical debt.
Engineers hate technical debt. If there is an easy project that they
can personally do to reduce tech debt, they’ll take it on
themselves. Engineering managers hate technical debt, too. If
there is an easy project that their team can execute in isolation,
they’ll get it scheduled. In aggregate, this leads to a dynamic in

which there is very little low-hanging fruit to reduce technical debt,
and most remaining options require many teams working together
to implement them. The result: migrations.
Each migration aims to create technical leverage (Your indexes no
longer have to fit on a single server!) or reduce technical debt (Your
acknowledged writes are guaranteed to persist a master failover!).
They occupy the awkward territory of reduced immediate
contribution today in exchange for more capacity tomorrow. This
makes migrations controversial to schedule, and as your systems
become larger, they become more expensive. Lore tells us that
Googlers have a phrase, “running to stand still,” to describe a team
whose entire capacity is consumed in upgrading dependencies and
patterns, such that the group can’t make forward progress on the
product/system they own. Spending all your time on migrations is
extreme, but every midsize company has a long queue of
migrations that it can’t staff: moving from VMs to containers,
rolling out circuit-breaking, moving to the new build tool . . . the list
extends effortlessly into the sunset.
Migrations are the only mechanism to effectively manage technical
debt as your company and code grow. If you don’t get effective at
software and system migrations, you’ll end up languishing in
technical debt. (And you’ll still have to do one later anyway, it’s just
that it’ll probably be a full rewrite.)

3.6.2 Running good migrations
The good news is that while migrations are hard, there is a pretty
standard playbook that works remarkably well: de-risk, enable,

then finish.

• De-risk
The first phase of a migration is de-risking it, and to do so as
quickly and cheaply as possible. Write a design document and
shop it with the teams that you believe will have the hardest time
migrating. Iterate. Shop it with teams who have atypical patterns
and edge cases. Iterate. Test it against the next six to twelve
months of roadmap. Iterate.
After you’ve evolved the design, the next step is to embed into the
most challenging one or two teams, and work side by side with
those teams to build, evolve, and migrate to the new system. Don’t
start with the easiest migrations, which can lead to a false sense of
security.
Effective de-risking is essential, because each team who
endorses a migration is making a bet on you that you’re going to
get this damn thing done, and not leave them with a migration to
an abandoned system that they have to revert to. If you leave one
migration partially finished, people will be exceedingly suspicious
of participating in the next.

• Enable
Once you’ve validated the solution that solves the intended
problem, it’s time to start sharpening your tools. Many folks start
migrations by generating tracking tickets for teams to implement,

but it’s better to slow down and build tooling to programmatically
migrate the easy 90 percent.24 This radically reduces the
migration’s cost to the broader organization, which increases the
organization’s success rate and creates more future opportunities
to migrate.
Once you’ve handled as much of the migration programmatically
as possible, figure out the self-service tooling and
documentation that you can provide to allow teams to make the
necessary changes without getting stuck. The best migration tools
are incremental and reversible: folks should be able to immediately
return to previous behavior if something goes wrong, and they
should have the necessary expressiveness to de-risk their
particular migration path.
Documentation and self-service tooling are products, and they
thrive under the same regime: sit down with some teams and
watch them follow your instructions, then improve them. Find
another team. Repeat. Spending an extra two days intentionally
making your documentation clean and your tools intuitive can save
years in large migrations. Do it!

• Finish
The last phase of a migration is deprecating the legacy system that
you’ve replaced. This requires getting to 100 percent adoption,
and that can be quite challenging.
Start by stopping the bleeding, which is ensuring that all newly
written code uses the new approach. That can be installing a
25

ratchet in your linters,25 or updating your documentation and selfservice tooling. This is always the first step, because it turns time
into your friend. Instead of falling behind by default, you’re now
making progress by default.
Okay, now you should start generating tracking tickets, and set
in place a mechanism which pushes migration status to teams
that need to migrate and to the general management structure. It’s
important to give wider management context around migrations
because the managers are the people who need to prioritize the
migrations: if a team isn’t working on a migration, it’s typically
because their leadership has not prioritized it.
At this point, you’re pretty close to complete, but you have the long
tail of weird or unstaffed work. Your tool now is: finish it yourself.
It’s not necessarily fun, but getting to 100 percent is going to
require the team leading the migration to dig into the nooks and
crannies themselves.
My final tip for finishing migrations centers around recognition. It’s
important to celebrate migrations while they’re ongoing, but the
majority of the celebration and recognition should be reserved
for their successful completion. In particular, starting but not
finishing migrations often incurs significant technical debt, so your
incentives and recognition structure should be careful to avoid
perverse incentives.

3.7

Running an engineering reorg

I believe that, at quickly growing companies, there are two
managerial skills that have a disproportionate impact on your
organization’s success: making technical migrations cheap, and
running clean reorganizations. Do both well, and you can skip that
lovely running-to-stand-still sensation, and invest your attention
more fruitfully.
Of the two, managing organizational change is more general, so
let’s work through a lightly structured framework for (re)designing
an engineering organization.
Caveat: this is more of a thinking tool than a recipe!
My approach for planning organization change:
1. Validate that organizational change is the right tool.
2. Project head count a year out.
3. Set target ratio of management to individual contributors.
4. Identify logical teams and groups of teams.
5. Plan staffing for the teams and groups.
6. Commit to moving forward.
7. Roll out the change.

Now, let’s drill into each of those a bit.

Figure 3.6
Refactoring organizations as they grow.

3.7.1 Is a reorg the right tool?
There are two best kinds of reorganizations:
The one that solves a structural problem.
The one that you don’t do.
There is only one worst kind of reorg: the one you do because
you’re avoiding a people management issue.
My checklist for ensuring that a reorganization is appropriate:
1. Is the problem structural? Organization change offers the
opportunity to increase communication, reduce decision
friction, and focus attention; if you’re looking for a different
change, consider if there’s a more direct approach.
2. Are you reorganizing to work around a broken relationship?
Management is a profession where karma always comes due,
and you’ll be better off addressing the underlying issue than
continuing to work around it.
3. Does the problem already exist? It’s better to wait until a
problem actively exists before solving it, because it’s
remarkably hard to predict future problems. Even if you’re
right that the problem will occur, you may end up hitting a
different problem first.
4. Are the conditions temporary? Are you in a major crunch
period or otherwise doing something you don’t anticipate

doing again? If so, then it may be easier to patch through and
rethink on the other side, and avoid optimizing for a transient
failure mode.
All right, so you’re still thinking that you want a reorg.

3.7.2 Project head count a year out
The first step of designing the organization is determining its
approximate total size. I recommend reasoning through this
number from three or four different directions:
1. An optimistic number based on what’s barely possible.
2. A number based on the “natural size” of your organization, if
every team and role was fully staffed.
3. A realistic number based on historical hiring rates.
Then merge those into a single number.
Unless you’ve changed something meaningful in your process, it’s
likely that the historical trend will hold accurate, and you should
weight that figure the most heavily (and my sense is that the list of
easy changes that significantly after hiring outcomes is short).
One of the goals of using the year-out head count number is to
avoid optimizing too heavily for your exact current situation and
the current individuals you’re working with. Organizational change
is so disruptive to so many people that I’ve increasingly come to
believe you should drive organizational design from the boxes and
not from the key individuals.

3.7.3 Manager-to-engineer ratio
Once you have your head count projection, you need to identify
how many individuals you want each manager to support. This
number particularly depends on your company’s working definition
of an engineering manager’s role. If engineering managers are
expected to do hands-on technical work, then their teams should
likely be three to five engineers (unless the team has been working
together well for a long time, in which case things get very specific
and hard to generalize about).
Otherwise, targeting five to eight engineers, depending on
experience level, is pretty typical. If you’re targeting more than
eight engineers per manager, then it’s worth reflecting on why you
believe your managers can support a significantly higher load than
industry average: Are they exceptionally experienced? Are your
expectations lower than typical?
In any case, pick your target, probably in the six-to-eight range.

3.7.4 Defining teams and groups
Now that you have your target organization size and target ratio of
managers to engineers, it’s time to figure out the general shape of
your organization!
Suppose that you have 35 engineers and 7 engineers per manager.
35 / 7 = 5 managers
Log⁷(35) ≈ 1.8 managers of managers, or second-degree managers

In a growing company, you should generally round up the number
of managers, as this is a calculation “at rest,” and your
organization will be a living, evolving thing.
Once you have the numbers, these are useful to ground you in the
general number of teams and groups of teams you should have.
In the first case, with 35 engineers, you’re going to want between
one and three groups, containing a total of five or six teams. In the
latter, with 74 engineers, you’ll want two to four groups, comprised
of 12 to 15 teams.
Once you’ve grounded yourself, here are some additional
considerations:
1. Can you write a crisp mission statement for each team?
2. Would you personally be excited to be a member of each of the
teams, as well as to be the manager of each of those teams?
3. Put teams that work together (especially poorly) as close
together as possible. This minimizes the distance for
escalations during disagreements, allowing arbiters to have
sufficient context. Also, most poor working relationships are
the by-product of information gaps, and nothing fills those
faster than proximity.
4. Can you define clear interfaces for each team?
5. Can you list the areas of ownership for each team?
6. Have you created a gap-less map of ownership, such that each
responsibility is owned by a team? Try to avoid implicitly

creating holes of ownership. If you need to create explicit holes
of ownership, that’s a better solution (essentially, defining
unstaffed teams).
7. Are there compelling candidate pitches for each of those
teams?
8. As always, are you over-optimizing on individuals versus
establishing a sensible structure?
This is the least formulaic aspect of organizational design, and, if
possible it’s a good time to lean on your network and similar
organizations for ideas.

3.7.5 Staffing the teams and groups
With your organization design and head count planning, you can
roughly determine when you’ll need to fill each of the technical and
management leadership positions.
From there, you have four sources of candidates to staff them:
1. Team members who are ready to fill the roles now.
2. Team members who can grow into the roles in the time frame.
3. Internal transfers from within your company.
4. External hires who already have the skills.
That is probably an ordered list of how you should try to fill the key
roles. This is true both because you want people who already know

your culture and because reorganizations that depend on yet-tobe-hired individuals are much harder to pull off successfully.
Specifically, I’d recommend having a spreadsheet listing every
single person’s name, their current team, and their future team.
Accidentally missing someone is the cardinal sin of reorganization.

3.7.6 Commit to moving forward
Now it’s time to make a go decision. A few questions to ask
yourself before you decide to fully commit:
1. Are the changes meaningful net positive?
2. Will the new structure last at least six months?
3. What problems did you discover during design?
4. What will trigger the reorg after this one?
5. Who is going to be impacted most?
After you’ve answered those questions, make sure to get not only
your own buy-in but also buy-ins from your peers and leadership.
Organizational change is rather resistant to rollback, so you have
to be collectively committed to moving forward with it, even if it
runs into challenges along the way (which, if history holds, it
almost certainly will).

3.7.7 Roll out the change

The final, and oftentimes most awkward, phase of a reorganization
is its rollout. There are three key elements to a good rollout:
1. Explanation of reasoning driving the reorganization.
2. Documentation of how each person and team will be impacted.
3. Availability and empathy to help bleed off frustration from
impacted individuals.
In general, the actual tactics for doing this are:
1. Discuss with heavily impacted individuals in private first.
2. Ensure that managers and other key individuals are prepared
to explain the reasoning behind the changes.
3. Send an email out documenting the changes.
4. Be available for discussion.
5. If necessary, hold an organization all-hands, but probably try
not to. People don’t process well in large groups, and the best
discussions take place in small rooms.
6. Double down on doing skip-level one-on-ones.
And with that, you’re done! You’ve worked through an engineering
reorganization. Hopefully, you won’t need to do that again for a
while.
As a closing thought, an organization is both (1) a collection of
people and (2) a manifestation of an idea separate from the
individuals comprising it. You can’t reason about organizations

purely from either direction. There are many, exceedingly valid,
different ways to think about any given reorganization, and you
should use these ideas as one model for thinking through changes,
not as a definitive roadmap.

3.8

Identify your controls

When I transitioned from directly supporting teams to instead
partnering their managers, I struggled to remain effective without
understanding their day-to-day tasks. My first instincts were to
retain the same fidelity of context over a much wider area, and for
the individuals working with me this was probably
indistinguishable from micromanagement. Maybe it even was
micromanagement.
Thanks to a great deal of feedback and reflection, I’ve gotten more
deliberate at identifying where to engage and where to hang back,
a process that I call identifying your controls.
Controls are the mechanisms that you use to align with other
leaders you work with, and they can range from defining metrics to
sprint planning (although I wouldn’t recommend the latter). There
is no universal set of controls—depending on the size of team and
your relationships with its leaders, you’ll want to mix and match—
but the controls structure itself is universally applicable.
Some of the most common controls that I’ve seen and used:
Metrics26 align on outcomes while leaving flexibility around how
the outcomes are achieved.
Visions27 ensure that you agree on long-term direction while
preserving short-term flexibility.

28

Strategies28 confirm you have a shared understanding of the
current constraints and how to address them.
Organization design allows you to coordinate the evolution of a
wider organization within the context of sub-organizations.
Head count and transfers are the ultimate form of prioritization,
and a good forum for validating how organizational priorities align
across individual teams.
Roadmaps align on problem selection and solution validation.
Performance reviews coordinate culture and recognition.
Etc. There are an infinite number of other possibilities, many of
which are specific to your company’s particular meetings and
forums. Start with this list, but don’t stick to it!
For whatever controls you pick, the second step is to agree on the
degree of alignment for each one. Some of the levels that I’ve found
useful are:
I’ll do it. Stuff that I will personally be responsible for doing. When
you’re going to do something, it’s better to be explicit and avoid
confusion on responsibilities. Best used sparingly.
Preview. I’d like to be involved early and often. This is probably an
area where we aren’t quite on the same page and this will help us
avoid redoing work.
Review. I’d like to weigh in before it gets published or fully rolled
out, but we’re pretty aligned on the topic.

Notes. Projects I’d like to follow but don’t have much I can add to.
Often used for wide-reaching initiatives on which we are well
aligned, and I want to be able to represent my colleagues’ work
correctly.
No surprises. The work that we’re currently aligned on but
requires updates to keep my mental model in tact. If I’m asked
about a related problem, I want to be able to answer it correctly.
This is particularly important for me, as my effectiveness is
evaluated based on my ability to stay on top of new problems.
Let me know. We’re well aligned on this, since my colleagues have
done it before and done it well. I want them to let me know if
something comes up that I can help with, but otherwise I’m totally
confident it’ll go well, so we don’t need to talk about this much.
Combine your controls and the degree of alignment for each, and
you’ve established the interface between you and the folks you
support. This reduces the ambiguity of how you work together and
allows everyone to focus. It’s useful for agreeing on performance
goals, and is also very useful for exposing alignment gaps between
you and individuals you work with (For example, it’s a worrisome
sign if you want to preview every bit of someone’s work, unless you
just started working together.)
Finally, this is a useful diagnostic for you as a leader to identify if
you are micromanaging. If you simply can’t imagine a world where
you don’t preview everyone’s work, it’s probably time to reflect a
bit on what’s holding you back from letting the team thrive.

3.9

Career narratives

A peculiar challenge of management is trying to invest in
someone’s career development when they themselves are
uncertain about their goals. As a manager, you may have more
experience and more access to opportunities within the company,
but that represents a small slice of someone’s career possibilities.
Our schooling often rewards us for being methodical, linear
thinkers, but that approach is less effective outside the
intentionally constrained possibility spaces.
The options for approaching a career, particularly for those of us
privileged to work in technology, are so extraordinarily vast that
exploring them effectively requires a different approach. This
vastness also means that you, as a manager, can’t simply give
folks a career path: you’ll inevitably steer them toward the most
obvious avenues and through avoidable competition.
Flipping perspectives, it’s also quite challenging to plan your own
career. I sometimes find myself walking from one meeting where
I’m coaching someone on their career goals, straight into a second
meeting where I struggle to string together words to articulate my
own. The hardest bit is that most folks are always at the furthest
point in their career, each change a step into the unknown, with
limited visibility into the upcoming opportunities that their
company can provide.
The intersection that I’ve found between the individual’s and their
manager’s perspective is the career narrative. I’ve explained these

fabled documents a few times before, in “Roles over Rocket
Ships”29 and “Partnering with Your Manager,”30 but given how
useful they can be, it’s useful to expand a bit on the process of
maintaining one.

3.9.1 Artificial competition
If you took 10 minutes to ask a dozen people about their immediate
career goals, I suspect that for 11 of them it would center on either
getting promoted or switching companies to reach the next
evolution of their current job. This doesn’t mean that climbing the
career ladder is bad—that’s what it’s designed for—but it has the
side effect of funneling most folks toward a constrained pool of
opportunity.
What I’ve slowly but increasingly come to believe is that there is
much more opportunity on career ladders than off of them, and by
including those opportunities you’ll make and feel more progress.
Better yet, you’ll find far more opportunities to partner with your
peers, no longer competing for limited promotion slots.
For example, if your long-term goal is to be the head of engineering
at a mid size company, you could approach that linearly by trying
to expand your role bit by bit at your current company on the track
to becoming its head of engineering. That’ll work for roughly one
person at the company, but for everyone else pursuing that same
path it will probably be suboptimal.
A different approach would be to instead work on identifying the
gaps that would keep you from being a strong head of engineering,

and then start using your current role to help fill those gaps. A
prototypical head of engineering will be skilled at organizational
design, process design, business strategy, recruiting, mentoring,
coaching, public speaking, and written communication. They’ll
also have a broad personal network and a broad foundation from
product engineering to infrastructure engineering. That’s not even
a particularly complete list of relevant skills! There are so many
different aspects to build out, and you can find opportunities to
practice all of them in your current role. There’s no need to
convince yourself that your current role is holding you back—
everything you need is here.
Importantly, while generalized career paths won’t necessarily align
cleanly with your goals, they are also unlikely to take full advantage
of your strengths. An important part of setting your goals is
developing areas you’re less experienced in to maximize your
global success, but it’s equally important to succeed locally within
your current environment by prioritizing doing what you do well.
With all of this in mind, take an hour and write up as many goals as
you can for what you’d like to accomplish in the next one to five
years. Then prioritize the list, pick a few that you’d like to focus on
for the next three to six months, and share it with your manager at
your next one-on-one.

3.9.2 Translating goals
Once you’ve identified goals to pursue, the next step is to translate
those goals into actions, and this is where your manager can be a
leveraged partner in iterating on your career narrative.

Managers tend to have a strong sense of the business’s needs, and
that gives them the superpower of finding the intersection of your
interests and the business’s priorities. That translation is a creative
pursuit, so don’t leave this entirely to your manager: participate as
well! Brainstorm projects, research how folks at other companies
have pursued similar goals, and educate your manager on aspects
of your goals that they don’t know much about. (For example,
engineers often have more conference speaking experience than
engineering managers do.)
Bringing your list of goals to this discussion helps ensure that it’s
successful. If you don’t bring a rough draft, by default you’ll get
steered toward the contested commons, and your career narrative
will be a dull instrument for progress.
This refined list of goals, aligned to your company’s priorities, then
becomes a central artifact for how you and your manager
collaborate on your career evolution. Every quarter or so, take
some time to refresh the document and review it together.
If you’re unconvinced that it’s worth your time to write a career
narrative, you certainly don’t have to write one. Most folks get
away with not writing one for their entire career and have deeply
fulfilling careers despite the absence.
That said, if you don’t, then there is probably no one guiding your
career. Chasing the next promotion is at best a marker on a massproduced treasure map, with every shovel and metal detector recovering the same patch. Don’t go there. Go somewhere that’s
disproportionately valuable to you because of who you are and
what you want.

3.10 The briefest of media trainings
When I was working at Digg,31 I was fortunate enough to get five
minutes of media training from my colleague Christine. As a
testament to her, that brief training lodged deeply in my head, and
I’ve found myself repeating it frequently ever since. Eventually, I
realized that I should probably just write it up!
The three rules for speaking with the media:
1. Answer the question you want to be asked. If someone asks
a very difficult or challenging question, reframe it into one that
you’re comfortable answering. Don’t accept a question’s
implicit framing, but instead take the opportunity to frame it
yourself. Don’t Think of An Elephant by George Lakoff 32 is a
phenomenal, compact guide to framing issues.
2. Stay positive. Negative stories can be very compelling. They
are quite risky, too! As an interviewee, find a positive framing
and stick to it. This is especially true when it comes to
competitors and controversy.
3. Speak in threes. Narrow your message down to three concise
points, make them your refrain, and continue to refer back to
your three speaking points.
That was it! Concise, compact, and I’m still using and learning from
that advice a decade later.

3.11

Model, document, and share

Early on in my career, I spent a lot of time trying to find my
leadership style. Recently, I think it’s more useful to think about
growing yourself as a leader by developing a range of styles and
applying them thoughtfully to your circumstances. Confining
yourself to one style is just too hard.
One of the trickiest, and most common, leadership scenarios is
leading without authority, and I’ve written about one of the styles
that I’ve found surprisingly effective in those conditions. I call it
Model, Document, Share.

Figure 3.7
The Model, Document, Share-Mandate approach.

3.11.1 How it works

Imagine that you’ve started a new job as an engineering manager,
and the teams around you are too busy to use a planning process.
You’ve mentioned to your peers a few times that you’ve seen
kanban33 work effectively, but folks tried it two years ago and are
still upset whenever the word is mentioned: it just doesn’t work
here.
Your first reaction might be to confront this head-on, but it takes a
while to build credibility after starting a new job. Sure, you’ve been
hired for your experience, so they respect your judgment, but it’s a
hard sell to convince someone that your personal experience
should invalidate their personal experience.
I’ve been trying something different.
Model. Start measuring your team’s health (maybe using short,
monthly surveys) and your team’s throughput (do some
lightweight form of task sizing, even if you just do it informally with
a senior engineer on the team or with yourself), which will allow you
to establish the baseline before your change.
Then just start running kanban. Don’t publicize it, don’t make a big
deal about it, just start doing it with your team. Frame it as a short
experiment with the team, and start trying it. Keep iterating on it
until you’re confident it works. Have the courage to keep at it for a
while, and also the courage to stop doing it if it doesn’t work after a
month or two. Use the team’s health and throughput metrics to
ground your decision about whether it’s working.
Document. After you’ve discovered an effective approach,
document the problem you set out to solve, the learning process
you went through, and the details of how another team would

adopt the practice for themselves. Be as detailed as possible: make
a canonical document, and even get a few folks on other teams to
check that it’s readable from their perspective.
Share. The final step is to share your documented approach, along
with your experience doing the rollout, in a short email. Don’t ask
everyone to adopt the practice, don’t lobby for change, just
present the approach and your experience following it.
You’ll spend the majority of your time refining approaches that
work effectively for your team, a bit of your time documenting how
you did it, and almost no time trying to convince folks to change
their approach.
Strangely, in my experience, this has often led to more adoption
than top-down mandates have.

3.11.2 Where it works
When considering how the Model, Document, Share approach
works, it’s interesting to compare it with the top-down mandate.
Mandates assume:
It’s better to adopt a good-enough approach quickly.
Teams have the bandwidth to adopt a new approach.
The organization has available resources to coordinate a
rollout.
You want to centralize decision-making on this topic.

Consistency is important; all teams need to approach this
problem in the same way.
It’s important to make this change quickly.
Model, Document, Share assumes:
It’s better to adopt a great approach slowly.
Some teams don’t have the bandwidth to adopt a new
approach.
The organization may not have resources to coordinate a
rollout.
You want to decentralize decision-making on this topic.
Teams have agency to adopt the appropriate practices for
themselves.
It’s okay to approach change gradually.
If your circumstances and your organization’s values align with the
second list, then this approach may be more effective for you than
making mandates. If you have the time, you can slowly flock toward
great practice, without needing organizational authority. (You’ll
still need some natural authority, the respect of your peers.)
Although I’ve seen this approach work remarkably well, I’ve also
seen it go nowhere. It’s a particular tool for certain circumstances,
and it does fail. It may be an inexpensive failure—folks simply don’t
adopt—as you haven’t spent much authority on it, but nonetheless
you still haven’t accomplished your goal. It’s particularly important

not to try to use this as a strategy to circumvent organizational
authority. Operating in direct conflict with authority usually doesn’t
end very well.

3.12 Scaling consistency: designing
centralized decision-making groups
In small organizations, it’s easy for individuals to be aware of what
others are doing and to remember how they’ve previously
approached similar problems. This hive mind and memory create
decision-making whose consistency correlates strongly with
quality. As organizations grow, there is a subtle slide into
inconsistency, which is often one of the most challenging aspects
of evolving from a small team into a much larger one.
There are many different approaches to try to manage
inconsistency creep. Some of the solutions I’ve seen are formalized
sprints, training, shadowing, documentation, code linters,34
process automation (particularly deploys), and incident reviews.
However, when the problem becomes truly acute, folks eventually
reach for the same tool: adding a centralized, accountable group.
The two most common flavors of this I’ve seen are “product
reviews” to standardize product decisions and the “architecture
group” to encourage consistent technical design. There are
hundreds of varieties, and they crop up wherever decisions are
made.
Some of these groups take on an authoritative bent, becoming
rigid gatekeepers, and others become more advisory, with a focus
on educating folks toward consistency. Depending on your culture
and how you value consistency, there are an infinite number of

approaches, and designing an effective decision-making group
depends on a handful of core decisions.

3.12.1 Positive and negative freedoms
Before jumping into design, a few words on the framing that I use
for reasoning about when to create a new centralized authority.
These groups typically consolidate significant authority from the
broader community into the hands of a few. Many folks will feel a
significant loss of freedom when you create these groups, as their
zone of decision-making will be newly limited. Less obviously,
many folks find the creation of centralized groups to be extremely
empowering. The difference? One group is largely populated by
individuals comfortable with self-authorization, and the latter
typically have a higher threshold for self-authorization.
This is just one example of the dynamics that play out across many
dimensions when you’re considering introducing a new authority,
and the most useful framework I’ve found for thinking through this
involves positive and negative freedoms. A positive freedom is the
freedom to do something, for example the freedom to pick a
programming language you prefer. A negative freedom is the
freedom from things happening to you, for example the freedom
not to be obligated to support additional programming languages,
even if others would greatly prefer them.
How are you shifting freedoms, and who are you shifting them
from? Particularly in cases where ownership is extremely diffuse, I
believe that cautiously authoritative groups do increase net
positive freedom for individuals without greatly reducing negative

freedom. That also happens to be my goal when designing a new
group!

3.12.2 Group design
Now that you’ve decided to create a decision-making group, it’s
time to get into the choices!
Influence. How do you expect this group to influence results? Will
they be an authoritative group that makes binding decisions? Will
you rely on the natural authority of the members you select? Will
they primarily work through advocacy? The answers to these
questions along with the particular folks in the group, will be the
primary factor in how your group impacts the positive and negative
freedoms of those they work with.
Interface. How will other teams interact with this team? Will they
submit tickets, send emails, attend a weekly review session? Will
you be reviewing work before it launches, or previewing designs
before they’re staffed? Depending on the kind of influence they’re
exerting and how your company works, you’ll want to play around
with different approaches.
Size. How large should the group be? If it’s six or fewer individuals,
it’s possible for them to gel into a true team, one whose members
know each other well, work together closely, and shift a significant
portion of their individual identities into the team. If the group has
more than ten members, you’ll find it hard to even have a good
discussion, and it’ll need to be structured into sub-groups to
function well (rotation that spreads members over time, working
groups of some members to focus on particular topics, and so on).

The larger the group, the more responsibility becomes diffuse, and
the more you’ll need to have specified roles within the group, for
example a member responsible for coordinating members’ focus.
Time commitment. How much time will members spend working
in this group? Will this be their top priority, or will they still
primarily be working on other projects? Higher time commitment
correlates with more actions and decisions. Consequently, my
sense is that you want time commitment to be higher for areas
where folks are directly impacted by the consequences of their
decisions, and to be lower for scenarios with weaker feedback
loops.
Identity. Should members view their role in the group as their
primary identity? Should they continue to identify primarily as
members of their existing team? You’ll need a small team and high
time commitment to support individuals shifting their identity.
Selection process. How will you select members? I’ve found the
best method to be a structured selection process,35 in which you
identify the requirements to be a member and the skills that you
believe will be valuable, and then allow folks to apply. Membership
in these groups often becomes an important signal of
organizational status, which makes having a consistent process for
selecting membership especially important.
Length of term. How long will members serve? Are these
permanent assignments, or are they fixed terms for, say, six
months? If they are fixed terms, are folks eligible for subsequent
elections? Is there a term limit? I’ve tried most combinations, and
my sense is that the best default is fixed terms, while allowing

current individuals to remain eligible, and without enacting term
limits.
Representation. How representative will this group be? Will you
explicitly select folks based on their teams, tenure, or seniority, or
will you allow clusters? Attention to this can help you avoid
architecture reviews that are missing front-end and product
engineers, as well as product reviews without infrastructure
perspective.
Predictably, each of these decisions will impact the effectiveness of
the others, which can make designing the group you want quite
tricky. Some formats will require particular kinds of individuals to
staff them, and you have to design groups that will work with the
people available to participate and the culture they are
participating within.

3.12.3 Failure modes
Before you release that email you’re writing to spin up a new
centralized decision-making group, it’s worth talking about the
four ways these groups consistently fail. They tend to be
domineering, bottlenecked, status-oriented, or inert.
Domineering groups significantly reduce individuals’ negative
and positive freedoms, and become churn factories for members.
This is most common when those making decisions are abstracted
from the consequences of the decisions, e.g., architecture groups
in which the members write little code.

Bottlenecked groups tend to be very helpful, but are trying to do
more then they’re actually able to do. These groups get worn
down, and either burn out their members or create a structured
backlog to avoid burning themselves out, which ends up seriously
slowing down folks who need their authority.
Status-oriented groups place more emphasis on being a member
of the group than on the group’s nominal purpose. The value of the
group revolves around recognition rather than contribution,
leading to folks who try to join the group for status, and the
diffusion of whatever original mission the group set out to resolve.
Inert groups just don’t do much of anything. Typically, these are
groups whose members have not gelled or are too busy. On the
plus side, this is by far the most benign of the four failure modes—
but you’re also missing out on a great deal of opportunity!
Having experienced each of these a few times, I try to ensure that
there is a manager embedded into every centralized group, and
that the manager is responsible for iterating on the format to dodge
these pitfalls.

3.13 Presenting to senior leadership
Yahoo! BOSS36 was partially powered by an internal Yahoo! search
technology named Vespa. We’d run into a bunch of challenges,
and I’d decided to convince my team we should migrate to SOLR.37
My manager asked me to put together a presentation for our next
team meeting. The meeting came, I started to present, and within
two slides things fell apart.
“No, no, this isn’t the way to put this together. This is like an
academic presentation. You have to start from the conclusion
first,” my manager lamented as he abruptly terminated my
presentation. Pausing to brush my deck’s fragments from his
boots, he offered some final wisdom: “And don’t use curved lines in
your diagrams. Those never make sense.”
It took me a few years to glean a lesson from that experience, but it
comes to mind frequently now when I work with folks who are just
starting to present to executives. Giving a presentation to senior
leadership is a bit of a dark art: it takes a while to master, and most
people who do it well can’t quite articulate how they do it. Worse
yet, many people who are excellent rely on advantages that resist
replication: charisma, quick wit, deep subject matter expertise, or
years of experience.
That said, few people watching me bomb my Yahoo! presentation
would have bet I’d ever figure this one out, so you should know that
it is a learnable skill. Along the way, I’ve picked up some tips that I
hope will help you prepare for your next presentation:

Communication is company-specific. Every company has
different communication styles and patterns. Successful
presenters probably can’t tell you what they do to succeed, but if
you watch them and take notes, you’ll identify some consistent
patterns. Each time you watch individuals present to leadership,
study their approach.
Start with the conclusion. Particularly in written communication,
folks skim until they get bored and then stop reading.
Accommodate this behavior by starting with what’s important,
instead of building toward it gradually.
Frame why the topic matters. Typically, you’ll be presenting on
an area that you’re intimately familiar with, and it’s probably very
obvious to you why the work matters. This will be much less
obvious to folks who don’t think about the area as often. Start by
explaining why your work matters to the company.
Everyone loves a narrative. Another aspect of framing the topic
is providing a narrative of where things are, how you got here, and
where you’re going now. This should be a sentence or two along
the lines of, “Last year, we had trouble closing several important
customers due to concerns about our scalability. We identified our
databases as our constraints to scaling, and since then our focus
has been moving to a new sharding model that enables horizontal
scaling. That’s going well, and we expect to finish in Q3.”
Prepare for detours. Many forums will allow you to lead your
presentation according to plan, but that is an unreliable prediction
when presenting to senior leadership. Instead, you need to be
prepared to lead the entire presentation yourself, while being

equally ready for the discussion to derail toward a thread of
unexpected questions.
Answer directly. Senior leaders tend to be indirectly responsible
for wide areas, and frequently pierce into areas to debug problems.
Their experience “debug piercing” tunes their radar for evasive
answers, and you don’t want to be a blip on that screen. Instead of
hiding problems, use them as an opportunity to explain your plans
to address them.
Deep in the data. You should be deep enough in your data that
you can use it to answer unexpected questions. This means
spending time exploring the data, and the most common way to do
that is to run a thorough goal-setting exercise.38
Derive actions from principles. One of your aims is to provide a
mental model of how you view the topic, allowing folks to get
familiar with how you make decisions. Showing you are “in the
data” is part of this. The other aspect is defining the guiding
principles you’re using to approach decisions.
Discuss the details. Some executives test presenters by diving
into the details, trying to uncover an area the presenter is
uncomfortable speaking on. You should be familiar with the details,
e.g., project statuses, but I think that it’s usually best to reframe
the discussion when you get too far into the details. Try to pop up
to either the data or the principles, which tend to be more useful
conversations.
Prepare a lot; practice a little. If you’re presenting to your entire
company, practicing your presentation is time well spent.
Leadership presentations tend to quickly detour, so practice isn’t

quite as useful. Practice until you’re comfortable, but prefer to
prepare instead getting deeper into the data, details, and
principles. As a corollary, if you’re knowledgeable in the area
you’re responsible for, and have spent time getting comfortable
with the format, over time you’ll find that you won’t need to prepare
much for these specifically. Rather, whether you’re able to present
effectively without much preparation will become a signal for
whether you’re keeping up with your span of responsibility.
Make a clear ask. If you don’t go into a meeting with leadership
with a clear goal, your meeting will either go nowhere or go poorly.
Start the meeting by explicitly framing your goal!
That’s a lot to remember, so I’ve synthesized these ideas into a
loose template. There absolutely is not a single right way to
present to senior leaders, but hopefully the template is a useful
starting point.

Figure 3.8
The expected and actual experience of presenting to executives.

My general approach to presenting to senior leaders is:
1. Tie topic to business value. One or two sentences to answer
the question “Why should anyone care?”
2. Establish historical narrative. Two to four sentences to help
folks understand how things are going, how we got here, and
what the next planned step is.
3. Explicit ask. What are you looking for from the audience? One
or two sentences.
4. Data-driven diagnosis. Along the lines of a strategy’s
diagnosis phase,39 explain the current constraints and
context, primarily through data. Try to provide enough raw
data to allow people to follow your analysis. If you only provide
analysis, then you’re asking folks to take you on trust, which
can come across as evasive. This should be a few paragraphs,
up to a page.
5. Decision-making principles. Explain the principles that
you’re applying against the diagnosis, articulating the mental
model you are using to make decisions.
6. What’s next and when it’ll be done. Apply your principles to
the diagnosis to generate the next steps. It should be clear to
folks reading along how your actions derive from your
principles and the data. If it’s not, then either rework your
principles or your actions!
7. Return to explicit ask. The final step is to return to your
explicit ask and ensure that you get the information or

guidance you need.
I’ve had a lot of luck with this format in general, and I think you’ll
find it pretty useful as a starting point. That said, the first rule
remains true: communication is company-specific. If things don’t
quite work for this format in your company, then watch how other
folks present. Given a few examples, you’ll be able to reverse
engineer the discussions that go well into a workable template.

3.14 Time management
When you sit down for coffee with a manager, you can probably
guess the biggest challenge on their mind: time management.
Sure, time management isn’t always everyone’s biggest challenge,
but once the crises of the day recede, it comes to the fore.
Time management is the enduring meta-problem of leadership.
For most other aspects of leadership, you can look to more
experienced managers and be reassured that things will get better,
but in this dimension it appears that the most tenured folks are the
ones most underwater. Yes, their degree of difficulty is certainly
higher, but it’s intimidating to consider that there’s little evidence
most folks ever get a solid grasp of their time.
Does that make this a lost cause? Nah.
I’m still pretty busy on a day-to-day basis, but I’ve gotten much,
much better at getting things done, not by getting faster but by
getting more logical about solving problems. The most impactful
changes I’ve made to how I manage time are:
Quarterly time retrospective. Every quarter, I spend a few hours
categorizing my calendar from the past three months to figure out
how I’ve invested my time. This is useful for me to reflect on the
major projects I’ve done, and also to get a sense of my general
allocation of time. I then use this analysis to shuffle my goal time
allocation for the next quarter.

Most folks are skeptical of whether this is time well spent, but I’ve
found it particularly helpful, and it’s the cornerstone of my efforts
to be mindful of my time.
Prioritize long-term success over short-term quality. As your
scope increases, the important work that you’re responsible for
may simply not be possible to finish. Worse, the work that you
believe is most important, perhaps high-quality one-on-ones, is
often competing with work that’s essential to long-term success,
like hiring for a critical role. Ultimately, you have to prioritize longterm success, even if it’s personally unrewarding to do so in the
short term. It’s not that I like this approach, it’s that nothing else
works.
Finish small, leveraged things. If you’re doing leveraged work,40
then each thing that you finish41 should create more bandwidth to
do more future work. It’s also very rewarding to finish things.
Together, these factors allow large volumes of quick things to build
into crescendoing momentum.
Stop doing things. When you’re quite underwater, a surprisingly
underutilized technique is to stop doing things. If you drop things
in an unstructured way, this goes very poorly, but done with
structure this works every time. Identify some critical work that you
won’t do, recategorize that newly unstaffed work as organizational
risk,42 and then alert your team and management chain that you
won’t be doing it. This last bit is essential: it’s fine to drop things,
but it’s quite bad to silently drop them.
Size backward, not forward. A good example of this is
scheduling skip-levels.43 When you start managing a multi-tier

team, say 20 individuals, you can specify a frequency for skiplevels and reason forward to figure out how many hours of skiplevels you’ll do in a given week. Say you have 16 indirect reports,
and you want to see them once a month for 30 minutes, so you end
up doing two hours per week.
This stops working as your team grows, because there is simply no
reasonable frequency that won’t end up consuming an
unsustainable number of hours. Instead, specify the number of
hours you’re able to dedicate to the activity, perhaps two per week,
and perform as many skip-levels as possible within that amount of
time. This method keeps you in control of your time allocation, and
it scales as your team grows.
Delegate working “in the system.” Wherever you’re working “in
the system,”44 design a path that will enable someone else to take
on that work. It might be that this plan will take a year to come
together, and that’s fine, but what’s not all right is if it’s going to
take a year and you haven’t even started.
Trust the system you build. Once you’ve built the system, at
some point you have to learn to trust it. The most important case of
this is handing off the responsibility to handle exceptions. Many
managers hold onto the authority to handle exceptions for too
long, and at that point you lose much of the system’s leverage.
Handling exceptions can easily consume all of your energy, and
either delegating them or designing them out of the system is
essential to scaling your time.
Decouple participation from productivity. As you grow more
senior, you’ll be invited to more meetings, and many of those

meetings will come with significant status. Attending those
meetings can make you feel powerful, but you have to keep
perspective about whether you’re accomplishing much by
attending. Sometimes, being able to convey important context to
your team is super valuable, and in those cases you should keep
attending, but don’t fall into the trap of assuming that attendance
is valuable.
Hire until you are slightly ahead of growth. The best gift of time
management that you can give yourself is hiring capable folks, and
hiring them before you get overwhelmed. By having a clear
organizational design, you can hire folks into roles before their
absence becomes crippling.
Calendar blocking. Creating blocks of time on your calendar is the
perennial trick of time management: add three or four two-hour
blocks scattered across your week to support more focused work.
It’s not especially effective, but it does work to some extent and is
quick to set up, which has made me a devoted user.
Getting administrative support. Once you’ve exhausted all the
above tools and approaches, the final thing to consider is getting
administrative support. I was once quite skeptical of whether
admin support is necessary—and, until your organization and
commitments reach a certain level of complexity, it isn’t—but at
some point having someone else handling the dozens of little
interruptions is a remarkable improvement.
As you start using more of these approaches, you won’t
immediately find yourself less busy, but you will gradually start to
finish more work. Over a longer period of time, though, you can get
less busy by prioritizing finishing things with the goal of reducing

load. If you’re creative and consequent, and if you don’t fall into the
trap of believing that being busy is being productive, you’ll find a
way to get the workload under control.

Figure 3.9
Calendar time-blocking for an engineering manager.

3.15 Communities of learning
I’ve always preferred learning in private. Got something difficult?
Sure, leave me alone for a few hours and I can probably figure it
out. If you want me to figure it out with you watching, I’m not even
sure how to start. This is partly introversion, but altogether I’m
pretty uncomfortable making mistakes in public. Like a lot of folks,
I have a brain that still helpfully reminds me of public errors I made
decades ago, and they still bother me.
For a very long time, this discomfort prevented me from
discovering one of the most rewarding elements of being in a
supportive work environment: building a community of learning
with your peers. This works especially well in a gelled “first
team,”45 and, recently I’ve been spending more time facilitating a
broader learning community of engineering managers.
When I first started facilitating the group, we focused on contentrich presentations. Each slide was dense with important lessons
and essential details. It didn’t work well. Folks weren’t engaged.
Attendance dropped. Learning was not the order of the day.
Since then, we’ve iterated on format and eventually stumbled on
an approach that has worked consistently:
1. Be a facilitator, not a lecturer. Folks want to learn from each
other more than they want to learn from a single presenter.
Step back and facilitate.

2. Brief presentations, long discussions. Present a few
minutes of content, maybe five, and then move into
discussion. Keep the discussions short enough that even if a
group doesn’t get traction on a given topic, it doesn’t become
awkward. A good time limit would be 10 minutes.
3. Small breakout groups. Giving folks time to discuss in small
groups allows them to learn a bit about the topic in a small,
safe place. It also gives everyone an opportunity to be part of
the discussion, which is a lot more engaging than listening to
others for an hour.
4. Bring learnings to the full group. After discussions, give
each group an opportunity to bring their discussion back to the
larger group, to allow the groups to cross-pollinate their
learnings.
5. Choose topics that people already know about. Successful
topics are ones that people have already thought about,
typically because these concepts are core to their daily work.
Ideally the topic is something that they do but would like to get
better at, such as one-on-ones, mentorship, coaching, or
career development.
People find it very hard to discuss content that they’ve just
learned if it’s too far away from their previous experience. That
also creates an environment where learning has to come from
the facilitator instead of from the group at large.
6. Encourage tenured folks to attend. For many learning
communities, you’ll find that the most senior or most tenured
folks opt out to focus on other work. This is a shame, because

there is so much for them to teach newer folks, and also
because it creates an opportunity for them to learn from and
get to know new members.
7. Optional pre-reads. Some folks aren’t comfortable being
introduced to a new topic in public, and for those individuals,
providing a list of optional pre-reads can help them prepare for
the discussion. I find that most people don’t read them (which,
surprisingly, I also found true when hosting paper-reading
groups46), but for some folks they’re very helpful.
8. Checking in. Depending on the size of the group, it can be
powerful to start by checking in with each other, having each
person give a 20- or 30-second self-introduction. The format
we’ve been using lately is your name, your team, and one
sentence about what’s on your mind. This is especially useful
in quickly growing communities, as it makes it easier for
individuals to meet each other.
The thing I enjoy most about this format is that it gives folks what
they really want, spending time learning from each other, and is
remarkably quick for the facilitator to prepare. I’m far from a
seasoned facilitator, and I’ve also found this format to be a
rewarding and safe opportunity for me to grow as a facilitator.
If your company doesn’t have any learning communities, give it a
try. I’ve found this one of the easiest, most rewarding things I’ve
had the opportunity to work on.

Figure 3.10
Structuring a meeting to facilitate a community of learning.

4

CHAPTER 4

Approaches

Figure 4.1
Visual representation of a well and poorly balanced organization.

Approaches
You unravel most puzzles knowing they’re solvable. You play
most games guided by a rule book. For engineering managers,
challenges emerge unexpected from a hundred small decisions,
with few rules and no promises. Many of these challenges are
difficult in the worst sense. There are few options for next steps
and pursuing any one of them feels problematic.
This chapter covers several such problems, including handling
policy exceptions, pushing back on requests from your
management chain, and scaling yourself in times of transition.
Management is an ethical profession, and our decisions matter,
especially the hard ones.

4.1

Work the policy, not the exceptions

At an early job, I worked with a coworker whose philosophy was “If
you don’t ask for it, you’ll never get it.” Which culminated in
continuous escalations to management for exceptional treatment.
This approach was pretty far from my intuition of how a well-run
organization should work, and it grated on my belief that
consistency is a precondition of fairness.
Since then, I’ve come to believe that environments that tolerate
frequent exceptions are not only susceptible to bias but are also
inefficient. Keeping an organization aligned is challenging in the
best of times, and exceptions undermine one of the most powerful
mechanisms for alignment: consistency.
Conversely, organizations survive by adapting to the dynamic
circumstances they live in. An organization stubbornly insisting on
its established routines is a company pacing a path whose grooves
lead to failure.
How do you reconcile consistency and change?
As with most seemingly opposing goals, the more time I spent
considering them, the less they were mutually exclusive.
Eventually, a unified approach emerged, which I call “Work the
policy, not the exceptions.”

4.1.1 Good policy is opinionated
1

Every policy you write is a small strategy,1 built by identifying your
goals and the constraints that bring actions into alignment with
those goals. It’s probably easiest to dig into an example.
One of the most interesting policies that I recently worked on was
designing who is able to join which teams in a company with both
many remote employees and many geographically distributed
offices. Our most important goals were:
1. Make every office a first-tier office; there are no second-tier
offices.
A first-tier office must own multiple critical projects, and its
work shouldn’t be constrained by support from other offices.
Furthermore, it must have many individuals physically present
who work together closely.
2. Ensure that remote engineers remain an essential, wellsupported cohort of the company.
Once we had agreed upon our goals, the next step was to codify
some constraints in order to narrow the scope of allowed actions to
those that supported our goals. In this case, a (slightly simplified)
set of constraints might be:
1. Teams are staffed in, at most, one office. (I say “at most” in
order to support the premise of teams composed entirely of
remote engineers.)
2. Employees in an office must be members of a team in that
office.
3. Remote employees may work on any team.

4. Employees within a 60 minute commute of an office must work
from that office.
These are good examples of constraints because they clearly
constrain allowed behaviors. You could imagine less opinionated
constraints, such as “folks in an office should prefer working on
teams within that office,” but that would do less to constrain
behavior.
If you find yourself writing constraints that don’t actually constrain
choice, it’s useful to check if you’re dancing around an unstated
goal that’s limiting your options. For example, in the above, you
might have an unstated goal that an employee pursuing their
preferred work is more important than offices being first-tier, which
would lead you toward weak constraint.
The fixed cost of creating and maintaining a policy is high enough
that I generally don’t recommend writing policies that do little to
constrain behavior. In fact, that’s a useful definition of bad policy.
In such cases, I instead recommend writing norms, which provide
nonbinding recommendations. Because they’re nonbinding, they
don’t require escalations to address ambiguities or edge cases.

4.1.2 Exception debt
Once you’ve supported your goals through constraints, all you
have to do is consistently uphold your constraints. This is easy to
say, but consistency requires no little bravery. Even with the best
intentions, I’ve often gone astray when it was time for me to
support my own policies.

The two reasons that applying policy consistently is particularly
challenging are:
1. Accepting reduced opportunity space. Good constraints
make trade-offs that deliberately narrow your opportunity
space. Some of the opportunities that you’ll encounter within
that space will be exceptionally good, and it’s hard to stay true
when faced with concrete consequences.
2. Locally suboptimal. Satisfying global constraints inevitably
leads to local inefficiency, sometimes forcing some teams to
deal with deeply challenging circumstances in order to support
a broader goal that they may experience little benefit from. It’s
hard to ask folks to accept such circumstances, harder to be
someone in one of those local inefficiencies, and hardest yet to
stick to the decisions at real personal cost to the folks you’re
impacting.
When we’ve picked thoughtful constraints to allow us to
accomplish important goals, we need the courage to bypass these
opportunities and accept these local inefficiencies. If we don’t
summon and maintain that courage, we incur most of the costs and
receive few of the benefits.
Policy success is directly dependent on how we handle requests for
exception. Granting exceptions undermines people’s sense of
fairness, and sets a precedent that undermines future policy. In
environments where exceptions become normalized, leaders often
find that issuing writs of exception—for policies they themselves
have designed—starts to swallow up much of their time.
Organizations spending significant time on exceptions are

experiencing exception debt. The escape is to stop working the
exceptions, and instead work the policy.

4.1.3 Work the policy
Once you’ve invested so much time into drafting policy, you have
to avoid undermining your work, and yourself, with exceptions.
That said, you can’t simply ignore escalations and exceptions
requests, which often represent incompatibilities between the
reality you designed your policy for and the reality you’re operating
in. Instead, collect every escalation as a test case for reconsidering
your constraints.
Once you’ve collected enough escalations, revisit the constraints
that you developed in the original policy, merge in the challenges
discovered in applying the policy, and either reaffirm the existing
constraints or generate a new series of constraints that handle the
escalations more effectively.
This approach is powerful because it creates a release valve for
folks who are frustrated with rough edges in your current policies—
they’re still welcome to escalate—while also ensuring that
everyone is operating in a consistent, fair environment; escalations
will only be used as inputs for updated policy, not handled in a oneoff fashion. The approach also maintains working on policy as a
leveraged operation for leadership, avoiding the onerous robes of
an exceptions judge.
When you roll out a policy, it’s quite helpful to declare a future time
when you’ll refresh it, which ensures that you’ll have the time to
fully evaluate your new policy before attempting revision. It’s fairly

common for folks to modify good, effective policy due to concerns
that arise before the policy has had time to show its effect. At a
sufficiently high rate of change, policy is indistinguishable from
exception.
The next time you’re about to dive into fixing a complicated one-off
situation, consider taking a step back and documenting the
problem but not trying to solve it. Commit to refreshing the policy
in a month, and batch all exceptions requests until then. Merge the
escalations and your current policy into a new revision. This will
save your time, build teams’ trust in the system, and move you
from working the exceptions to working the policy.

4.2

Saying no

Some years back, I was sitting in a room with my manager, our
CTO, and a crisis. An engineer on my team had mishandled two
alerts, which had cascaded into plausibly the worst production
incident that the company had experienced to date. There were
three root causes: alert fatigue, a lack of velocity context for out-ofdisk-space alerts, and our reliance on a centralized database with
little support for vertical scaling. At that moment, though, we were
no longer talking about root causes. We were discussing whether
to fire the on-call engineer, and I was saying no.
It was in that era of my career that I came to view management as,
at its core, a moral profession. We have the opportunity to create
an environment for those around us to be their best, in fair
surroundings. For me, that’s both an opportunity and an obligation
for managers, and saying no in that room with my manager and
CTO was, in part, my decision to hold the line on what’s right.
However, there was a second no in that room, and it’s one you’ll
use routinely even under the best of circumstances. That no is an
expression of what is possible for the team you lead to do. I felt that
the decision would be wrong, but also that the precedent of firing
people for on-call mistakes would irreparably damage the morale
of a team who already saw their phone batteries drained before the
end of a 12 hour on-call shift.
This no is explaining your team’s constraints to folks outside the
team, and it’s one of the most important activities you undertake
as an engineering leader.

4.2.1 Constraints
Folks who communicate a no effectively are not the firmest
speakers, nor do they make frequent use of the word itself. They
are able to convincingly explain their team’s constraints and
articulate why the proposed path is either unattainable or
undesirable.
Articulating your constraints depends on the particulars of the
issue at hand, but I find that two topics are frequent venues of
disagreement. The first is velocity: Why is this taking so long when
it should take a couple of hours? The other is prioritization: Why
can’t you work on this other, more important, project?
Let’s dig into how to have those conversations constructively.

4.2.2 Velocity
When folks want you to commit to more work than you believe you
can deliver, your goal is to provide a compelling explanation of how
your team finishes work. Finishes is particularly important, as
opposed to does, because partial work has no value, and your
team’s defining constraints are often in the finishing stages. The
most effective approach that I’ve found for explaining your team’s
delivery process is to build a kanban board2 describing the steps
that work goes through, and documenting who performs which
steps. You don’t have to switch to using a kanban system,
although I’ve found it very effective for debugging team
performance, you just have to populate the board once to expose
your current constraints.

Using this board, you’ll be able to explain what the current
constraints are for execution, and help your team narrow
suggestions for improvement down to areas that will actually help.
If you don’t provide this framework, people tend to start making
suggestions everywhere across your process, which at best means
many ideas won’t reduce load where it’s most helpful, and at worst
may inadvertently increase load.
You want to focus your team on your core constraint, the single
inefficient component that’s slowing down your throughput of
finished work. Once you’ve focused the conversation on your core
constraint, the next step is explaining what’s preventing you from
solving for it. At many technology companies this comes down to
technical debt or toil. However, the specters of technical debt and
toil have been used to shirk so much responsibility that simply
naming them tends to be unconvincing.
Instead, you have to translate the problem into something
resembling data. If you’re following a consistent project
management methodology, this can be as easy as explaining how
you decide the number of story points for each sprint, along with
how that number has trended over time. If not, I’ve found it useful
to borrow the approach of a sampling profiler: for a week, check
what your team is working on at a few random moments across the
day, and use that as an approximation of how time is being spent.
Once you’re able to explain your constraints and how time is being
spent, then you’re having a useful conversation about whether you
can shift time from other behaviors toward your constraints. The
final stage comes next, which is the discussion around adding
capacity.

There are two ways to add capacity: move existing resources to the
team (away from what they’re currently doing) or create new
resources (typically through hiring). Neither is a panacea, and they
are explored in “A Case against Top-Down Global Optimization”3
and “Productivity in the Age of Hypergrowth,”4 respectively.
Putting it all together, the best outcome of a discussion on velocity
is to identify a reality-based approach that will support your core
constraint. The second-best outcome is for folks to agree that
you’re properly allocated against your constraints and to shift the
conversation to prioritization. (Those are the only good outcomes.)

4.2.3 Priorities
Although shifting from a discussion about velocity to one about
prioritization is a good outcome, expressing your priorities
convincingly can be a difficult, daunting task. I recommend
breaking it down into three discrete steps: document all your
incoming asks, develop guiding principles for how work is selected,
and then share subsets of tasks you’ve selected based on those
guiding principles. Hopefully, documenting your incoming asks is
as straightforward as auditing your team’s tickets, but it’s pretty
common for some of the most important asks to be
undocumented. What I’ve found effective is to blend existing
planning artifacts (typically quarterly/annual plans) and your
tickets into a list, and then test it against your most important
stakeholders. Keep asking those who routinely have dependencies
on your team, “Does this seem like the right list of tasks?” The
result will be a fairly accurate artifact.

From there, you have to pick the guiding principles that you’ll use
for selecting tasks. How you’ll do that will depend on your team
and your company—infrastructure teams will pick different guides5
than product teams will, but they’ll likely be grounded in your
company’s top-level plans and will intersect with your team’s
mission. (The most controversial guides tend to be statements
about the value of current work versus future work, for example
doing investment work today that will pay off in two years but limit
value in the short term. One technique that I’ve found useful for this
particular scenario is specifying quotas for both immediate and
long-term work.)
The last step is sitting down with your team and applying your
guiding principles to the universe of incoming asks, then finding
the subset to prioritize. You’ll continuously get more requests to
do work, so it’s important that this process is lightweight enough
that you can rerun it periodically.
Which, it so happens, is exactly what you should do when a
stakeholder disagrees with your priorities. Understand their
requests, and sit down with them to test their ask against your
guiding principles and your currently prioritized work. If their
request is more important than your current work, shift priorities at
your next planning session. (To limit churn created by shifting
priorities, it’s useful to wait for the next planning session instead of
making these changes immediately. This does mean that you’ll
need to be refreshing your plan at least monthly.)

4.2.4 Relationships

If you’ve poured time into explaining both your velocity and
priorities but your perspective still isn’t resonating, then it’s fairly
likely that you have a relationship problem to address. In that case,
the next step isn’t investing more energy in explaining your
constraints, but instead working on how you partner with your
individual stakeholders.

4.3

Your philosophy of management

For me, the first few years of management were a wild frenzy. Every
situation was brand-new, and I puzzled through each decision from
the ground up. Over time, I developed some rules of thumb and
guidelines, but only the experience of managing managers has
truly refined my thoughts on management.
When I started managing, my leadership philosophy was simple:
1. The Golden Rule6 makes a lot of sense.
2. Give everyone an explicit area of ownership that they are
responsible for.
3. Reward and status should derive from finishing high-quality
work.
4. Lead from the front, and never ask anyone to do something
you wouldn’t.
These have served well as a foundation, but by applying them
repeatedly over time and circumstance, I’ve seen them fray on the
edge cases. Learning forward, I’ve started to weave in a number of
additional ideas in the vain quest for a unified theory of
management.

4.3.1 An ethical profession

I believe that management, at its core, is an ethical profession. To
see ourselves, we don’t look at the mirror, but rather at how we
treat a member of the team who is not succeeding. Not at the
mirror, but at our compensation philosophy. Not at the mirror, but
at how we pitch the roles to candidates. Whom we promote. How
we assign raises. Provide growth opportunities. PTO requests.
Working hours.
We have such a huge impact on the people we work with—and
especially on the people who work “for” us—and taking
responsibility for that impact is fundamental to good management.
This doesn’t always mean being your team’s best friend.
Sometimes it means asking them to make personal sacrifices,
letting go of a popular member of the team, or canceling a project
the team is excited about. It’s remembering that you leave a broad
wake, and that your actions have a profound impact on those
around you.

4.3.2 Strong relationships > any problem
I believe that almost every internal problem can be traced back to a
missing or poor relationship, and that with great relationships it is
possible to come together and solve almost anything.
Technical disagreements become learning opportunities for
everyone. Setbacks are now a shared experience that offers the
opportunity to gel together as a team.
Even with great relationships, there are still real challenges! You
have a limited budget for giving raises and can’t satisfy everyone. If

your customers don’t love your product, camaraderie can’t pay
salaries. Some technical problems are genuinely novel, without an
obvious solution, and sometimes the obvious solution is costprohibitive.
That said, I try to start debugging problems from the relationship
angle, and I find this technique pretty effective.

4.3.3 People over process
A few years back, one of the leaders I worked with told me, “With
the right people, any process works, and with the wrong people, no
process works.”
I’ve found this to be pretty accurate.
Process is a tool to make it easy to collaborate, and the process
that the team enjoys is usually the right process. If your process is
failing somehow, it’s worth really digging into how it’s failing before
you start looking for another process to replace it.
As you start homing in on the problem (maybe it’s you!), honestly
ask yourself if a different process would address it, or if you’re
moving around the food on your plate. My experience is that a
different process probably isn’t the solution you’re looking for.

4.3.4 Do the hard thing now
In this profession, we’re often asked to deal with difficult situations.
No set of rules can guide you safely through every scenario, but I

have found that postponement is never the best solution.
Instead of avoiding the hardest parts, double down on them.
If you have a poor relationship with your manager or a member of
your team, spend even more time with them. Meet with them every
day, or have dinner with them. If two engineers are struggling to
work together, before you separate them onto different teams get
them to spend more time together trying to understand each
other’s perspective. (There are some obvious exceptions here, but
if two people truly cannot work together, is there something else
there that you’ve been avoiding dealing with?)
As a leader, you can’t run from problems; engage ’em head-on.

4.3.5 Your company, your team, yourself
Lately, I’ve come to have something of a mantra for guiding
decisionmaking: do the right thing for the company, the right thing
for the team, and the right thing for yourself, in that order. This is
pretty obvious on some levels, but I’ve found it to be a useful
thinking aid.
First, all thinking should start from a company perspective, and
you should make sure that what you’re doing is not creating
negative externalities for the company or the other teams you work
with. For example, you’re really excited about trying out a new
programming language in a project, but you should also make sure
that you’ve considered the additional maintenance cost for the rest
of the company.

Next, make sure that your choices are being made on behalf of your
team, not on your own behalf. This might mean pushing back on a
timeline that would force your team into a death march, even
though it’s uncomfortable to have that conversation with your
manager or your product partner.
Last in the list is yourself, but while I do believe that you should
generally put yourself last, it’s also a reminder to “pay yourself.”
Burnout is endemic in our industry, and a burned-out manager
often leaks onto their team. Give as much as you can sustainably
give, and draw the line there.

4.3.6 Think for yourself
So much of what we take for granted is cargo-culted instead of
done with intention. Early in your management career, you’ll have
to figure out how to approach common challenges: interviewing,
performance management, promotions, raises. It’s totally all right
to start out by following what you see around you—learning from
your peers is critical to success. However, it’s also important to be
honest about which of your practices are truly best practices and
which you’re following on autopilot.
The recent focus on programming interviews7 is a great example.
Most hiring managers, myself certainly included, are aware that
they’re conducting mediocre interviews, but over time it’s easy to
lose that perspective. You can’t fix everything at once, so you’ll
often be doing something mediocre at any given point in time, but
remember to come back and improve it when you can (e.g., pay
down your management debt).

As a final thought, the best management philosophy never stands
still, but—in the model of the Hegelian dialectic8—continues to
evolve as it comes in contact with reality. The worst theory of
management is to not have one at all, but the second worst is one
that doesn’t change.

4.4

Managing in the growth plates

My last year at Digg, we were heads-down executing, trying to
carve a path out of falling user numbers and an evaporating cash
reserve. When we were acquired by SocialCode, I jumped right into
execution mode, and instant conflict. What I’d learned over the
past two years about leadership—execute, execute, execute—was
disruptive, and I couldn’t figure out why. I’ve seen the opposite
happen just as often, when experienced, successful managers from
well-established companies dive into a startup and exit soon
thereafter with a legacy of ineffective initiatives.
The most confusing places to start are midsize, rapidly growing
companies. That’s because parts of the company are growing
quickly, with an emphasis on execution, and other parts have
largely stabilized, with ideas becoming the more valued currency.
Long bones have growth plates at their ends, which is where the
growth happens, and the middle doesn’t grow. This is a pretty apt
metaphor for rapidly growing companies, and a useful mental
model when trying to understand why your behaviors might not be
resonating in a new role.

4.4.1 In the growth plates
At a small startup or in a rapidly growing company’s growth plates,
you’re mostly dealing with new problems. These new problems
aren’t necessarily novel (most problems are people problems), but
they are problems that your company has never prioritized long

enough to get a usable solution out the door. This means that you
can’t expect to succeed by iterating on the status quo.
You’d expect that novel ideas would be heavily valued in these
circumstances, but, interestingly, it’s the opposite: execution is
the primary currency in the growth plates. That’s because you
typically have a surplus of fairly obvious ideas to try, and there is
constrained bandwidth for evaluating those ideas.
It’s common for well-meaning individuals from outside the growth
plates to jump in to help by supplying more ideas, but that’s
counterproductive. What folks in the growth plates need is help
reducing and executing the existing backlog of ideas, not adding
more ideas that must be evaluated. Teams in these scenarios are
missing the concrete resources necessary to execute, and
supplying those resources is the only way to help. Giving more
ideas feels helpful, but isn’t.
Finally, I think it’s important to recognize to recognize that, in the
growth plates, you are focused on surviving to the next round,
which might be a different growth challenge, or might be the team
stabilizing. It is extremely hard to consistently do the basics well in
these circumstances, because you simply won’t have enough time
to do them well. You’ll have to get comfortable doing as well as
time constraints allow, and sometimes that will lead to being
mediocre at things you’re passionate about. I personally find that I
shift into working on the system,9 and—embarrassingly and
unfortunately—tend to cut down on many facets of people
management.

4.4.2 Outside the growth plates

Away from the growth plates, you are mostly working on problems
with known solutions. Known solutions are amenable to iterative
improvement, so it would make sense for execution to be highly
valued, but I find that, in practice, ideas—especially ideas that are
new within your company—are most highly prized.
All slow-growth environments used to be high-growth
environments, which means they were once run by someone who
was a sufficiently effective executor to evolve them into a slowgrowth environment. Consequently there tends to be less iterative
improvement available than you’d expect. So often, we make solid
executors responsible for slower-growth areas—we need the
innovators in the highest-growth ones—but the opposite tends to
work better.
As a manager, this is the environment for you to do the basics very,
very well. Spend time building rich relationships, gelling your team,
working with them on career development. Build up so that when
innovation or external change pushes you off your local maxima,
you and the team are ready and rested.

4.4.3 Aligning with values
The message I’d end with is a simple one: be thoughtful about
carrying your values with you from one context into another.
Leadership is matching appropriate action to your current context,
and it’s pretty uncommon that any two situations will flourish from
the same behaviors. If you’re working in the growth plates—or
outside of them—for the first time, treat it like a brand-new role. It
is!

4.5

Ways engineering managers get stuck

As a new manager, I found it useful to start each performance
review season by rereading! Which also means it’s an excellent
time to reread Camille Fournier’s “How Do Individual Contributors
Get Stuck?”10 Over time, I found myself wanting a manager-centric
version, and eventually that desire solidified into the following list.
Following in Fournier’s tradition, I was thinking about the parallels
for engineering managers. Managers work more indirectly, so
when we get stuck it isn’t always quite as obvious, but we
absolutely do get stuck, both on individual projects and in our
careers.
Here are a few ways that happens.
Newer managers, often in their first couple of years:
1. Only manage down. This often manifests in building
something your team wants to build, but which the company
and your customers aren’t interested in.
2. Only manage up. In Pearl S. Buck’s The Good Earth,11 she
writes, “All power comes from the Earth.” In management,
power comes from a healthy team. Some managers focus so
much on following their management’s wishes that their team
evaporates beneath them.
3. Never manage up. Your team’s success and recognition
depend significantly on your relationship with your

management chain. It’s common for excellent work to go
unnoticed because it was never shared upward.
4. Optimize locally. Picking technologies that the company
can’t support, or building a product that puts you in
competition with another team.
5. Assume that hiring never solves any problems. When
you’re behind, it can be tempting to spend all of your time
firefighting and neglect hiring, but if your business is growing
quickly, then eventually you hire or burn out.
6. Don’t spend time building relationships. Your team’s
impact depends largely on doing something that other teams
or customers want, and getting it shipped out the door. This is
extraordinarily hard without a supportive social network within
the company.
7. Define their role too narrowly. Effective managers tend to
become the glue in their team, filling any gaps. Sometimes
that means doing things you don’t really want to do, in order to
set a good example.
8. Forget that their manager is a human being. It’s easy to get
frustrated with your manager when they put you in bad
situations, forget to tell you something important, or commit
your team to something without consulting you, but they
almost certainly did it with the best of intentions. To have a
good relationship with your manager, you have to give them
room to make mistakes.
More experienced managers:

1. Do what worked at their previous company. When you start
a new job or new role, it’s important to pause to listen and
foster awareness before you start “fixing” everything.
Otherwise, you’re fixing problems that may not exist, and
doing so with tools that may not be appropriate.
2. Spend too much time building relationships. This is
particularly common in managers coming from larger
companies into smaller ones, and it creates the perception
that the manager isn’t contributing anything of value. This
tends to be because smaller companies expect more
execution focus than relationship management focus from
their managers.
3. Assume that more hiring can solve every problem. Adding
a few wonderful people to the team can solve many problems,
but adding too many people can dilute your culture, and lead
to people with unclear roles and responsibilities.
4. Abscond rather than delegate. Delegation is important, but
it’s easy to go too far and ignore the critical responsibilities
that you’ve asked others to take on, only to discover an easily
averted disaster later on.
5. Become disconnected from ground truth. Particularly at
larger companies, it can become frequent to make decisions
that appear to be fundamentally disconnected from reality.
Managers of any and all levels of experience:
1. Mistake team size for impact. Managing a larger team is not
a better job, it’s a different job. It also won’t make you

important or make you happier. It’s hard to unlearn a fixation
on team size, but if you can, it’ll change your career for the
better.
2. Mistake title for impact. Titles are arbitrary social constructs
that only make sense in the context they’re given. Titles don’t
translate across companies meaningfully, and they’re a deeply
flawed way to judge yourself or others. Don’t let them become
your goal.
3. Confuse authority with truth. Authority lets you get away
with weak arguments and poor justifications, but it’s a pretty
expensive way to work with people, because they’ll eventually
turn off their minds and simply follow orders—if they’re in a
complicated compensation or life situation, that is. Otherwise,
they’ll just leave.
4. Don’t trust the team enough to delegate. You can’t scale
your impact or engage your team if you don’t give them
enough room to do things differently than you would. Many
organizations become bottlenecked on approvals, which is a
sure proxy for lack of trust.
5. Let other people manage their time. Most managers have
significantly more work they could be doing than they’re able
to do. This will probably be your status quo for the rest of your
career, and it’s important to prioritize your time on important
things, and not simply on whatever happens to end up on your
calendar.
6. Only see the problems. It can be easy to only see what’s
going wrong, and forget to celebrate the good stuff. Down this

path lie frustration and madness.
I’m certain there are hundreds more ways that managers get stuck,
but those are the ones that came to mind first!

4.6

Partnering with your manager

At my first software job, I chatted one-on-one with my manager
twice in two years, including my first year, when I was remote and
three time zones away. In that situation, you either become selfmanaging or you get let go for inactivity, and somehow I found
things to do. (I’d like to add useful to things, but as best I can tell,
my team’s software was unilaterally thrown away, so that’s hard to
justify.)
Something that experience didn’t equip me to do well is partner
with my manager. I came away without a mental model for what
management does, let alone how you would work with them. It’s
been a rocky path for me to figure out a healthier approach, and if
you’ve faced a similar struggle, hopefully these ideas will help.
To partner successfully with your manager:
1. You need them to know a few things about you.
2. You need to know a few things about them.
3. You should occasionally update the things you know about
each other.
Things your manager should know about you:
What problems you’re trying solve. How you’re trying to solve
each of them.

That you’re making progress. (Specifically, that you’re not
stuck.)
What you prefer to work on. (So that they can staff you
properly.)
How busy you are. (So that they know if you can take on an
opportunity that comes up.)
What your professional goals and growth areas are. Where you
are between bored and challenged.
How you believe you’re being measured. (A rubric, company
values, some KPIs, etc.)
Some managers are easier to keep informed than others, and
success hinges on finding the communication mechanism that
works for them. The approach that I’ve found works well is:
1. Maintain a document with this information, which you keep
updated and share with your manager. For some managers,
this will be enough! Mission accomplished.
2. Sprinkle this information into your one-on-ones, focusing on
information gaps (you’re not seeing support around a growth
area, you’re too busy, or not busy enough, and so on). Success
is filling in information gaps, not reciting a mantra.
3. At some regular point, maybe quarterly, write up a selfreflection that covers each of those aspects. (I’ve been
experimenting with a “career narrative” format that is
essentially a stack of quarterly self-reflections.) Share that
with your manager, and maybe with your peers too!

A few managers seemingly just don’t care, and I’ve always found
that those managers do care, and are too stressed to participate in
successful communication. This leads to the other key aspect of
managing up: knowing some things about your manager and their
needs.
Here are some good things to know:
What are their current priorities? Particularly, what are their
problems and key initiatives. When I get asked this question, I
often can’t answer it directly, because what I’m focused on is
people-related, but it’s a warning sign if your manager never
answers it (either because because they don’t know, or they
are always working on people issues).
How stressed are they? How busy are they? Do they feel like
they have time to grow in their role or are they grinding?
Is there anything you can do to help? This is particularly
valuable for managers who don’t have strong delegation
instincts.
What is their management’s priority for them?
What are they trying to improve on themselves, and what are
their goals? This is particularly valuable to know if they appear
stuck,12 because you may be able to help unstick them. (You
could be especially helpful by redefining impact in terms of
work that your team can accomplish versus growing team size,
which is a frequent source of stickiness!)

It’s relatively uncommon for managers to be unwilling to answer
these kinds of questions. (Either they’re open and glad to share or
are willing to speak about themselves.) However, it is fairly
common for them to not know the answers. In those cases, each of
these questions can be a pretty expansive topic for a one-on-one.

4.7

Finding managerial scope

I was chatting with an engineering manager last week, and he
mentioned that the jobs he really wants are VP of Engineering
roles, but he feels that no one is willing to take a gamble on him.
Instead, he’s looking at line management opportunities in fastgrowing companies where he can go in with a small team and
rapidly grow managerial scope as the company grows around him.
Rather than casting a stone, I promptly threw all my stones away:
I’ve been guilty of pursuing exactly that strategy in a previous job
hunt.
If you luck into a good situation, career progression can be so
automatic early in your career that it can take a while to realize later
in your career that your progression’s slope has flattened out like a
penny thrown off the Empire State Building and then run over by a
coal train.
Broadly, there are three types of engineering management jobs:
1. Manager: you manage a team directly,
2. Director: you manage a team of managers,
3. VP: you manage an organization.
Especially early in your management career, it’s easy to conflate
reaching the next “rung” with reaching a certain number of people
you’ve managed. Following this line of reasoning, for a 100-person

company to hire you, you might need five direct reports to be a
manager, 20 to be a director, and 40 to be a VP.
It’s easier to focus on team size than title because the low cost of
minting titles drives a fiercely inflationary economy. At Digg, I
became a Director of Engineering because the company and my
team kept shrinking. Far from a recognition of my success, this was
a party favor for participating in one of history’s great showcases of
snatching defeat from the jaws of victory.
As managers looking to grow ourselves, we should really be
pursuing scope: not enumerating people but taking responsibility
for the success of increasingly important and complex facets of the
organization and company. This is where advancing your career
can veer away from a zero-sum competition to have the largest
team and evolve into a virtuous cycle of empowering the
organization and taking on more responsibility.
There is a lot less competition for hard work.
Companies will always need someone to run their cost-accounting
initiatives, to set up their approach to on-call, to iterate on their
engineer-recruiting process. Strong execution in these
crosscutting projects will give you the same personal and career
growth as managing a larger team. Project-managing an initiative
working with 50 engineering managers is a far better learning
opportunity than managing an organization of 50, and it builds the
same skills.
This realization was very important and empowering for me: you
can always find an opportunity to increase your scope and learning,

even in a company that doesn’t have room for more directors or
vice presidents.
It also changed how I hire engineering managers, allowing me to
switch from the pitch of managing a larger team as the company
grows—an oversubscribed dream if there ever was one—to a more
meaningful and more reliably attainable dream of growing scope
through broad, complex projects.
If you’ve been focused on growing the size of your team as the
gateway to career growth, call bullshit on all that,13 and look for a
gap in your organization or company that you can try to fill.
You’ll be a lot happier.

4.8

Setting organizational direction

It took me two years as a manager to reach the “leadership is
lonely” phase. Folks had warned me that it would happen, and it
did. The team was struggling to acclimatize after acquisition, and I
felt like I was carrying the stress alone. I saw the problems, but
didn’t know how to make progress on them. Two years later, I’d
learned more about management, was increasingly able to rely on
experience over invention, and was no longer lonely.
When I began managing managers, things shifted. I felt certain that
I knew how to solve all the problems, but I didn’t know how to rely
on others to solve them, and often learned of problems long after
they’d deteriorated. Delegation, metrics, meetings, and process—
practices that I’d considered obvious or unimportant—crept into
my tool kit, and I started to regain my footing.
Over the past year, as I’ve transitioned into largely working with
managers of managers, things have shifted again. Let’s explore
that a bit.

4.8.1 Scarce feedback, vague direction
For much of your early career, you’ll have folks who are routinely
giving feedback on your work. As your span of responsibility
grows, particularly if it’s somewhat specialized, increasingly no
one will feel responsible for or able to provide that feedback. In a

new function, at a small company, your team might be two people,
and already you’re inhabiting this realm of muted feedback.
Where you used to get direct, actionable advice, now you’re
listening for ghosts: grumbles on your team about too much
technical debt, the rumor that two peers are engaged in some light
feuding, agitation where there was previously calm.
As a functional leader, you’ll be expected to set your own direction
with little direction from others. When things in your area are going
poorly, you’ll be swamped with more direction and input than you
can readily absorb, but when things are going well, you’ll often be
responsible for supplying your own direction and that of your team.
If you don’t supply it yourself, you’ll start to feel the pull of
irrelevance: Maybe no one really cares what we do? What would
happen if I stopped showing up? Maybe I should be doing
something different?
That initial instinct to leave after hitting a pocket of seeming
irrelevance is a comforting one, but it’s the wrong way to go. You
can certainly avoid the current swells of ambivalence by switching
jobs, but if you’re successful at another company then you’ll end
up in the same situation.
This is a symptom of success. You have to learn the lesson it’s
trying to teach you: How to set your organization’s direction and
your own.

4.8.2 Mining for direction

The first step to setting direction is to cast the widest possible net
for ideas. Talk to folks at your company who have worked at
different kinds of companies, and ask what those companies did
really well. Talk to your team and see if there are ideas to draw out
that they’ve been noodling on but haven’t yet volunteered. Read
some new technical papers.14 Meet with peer companies and ask
them what they’re focused on. Do the same with the
Googles/Facebooks and the smallest, most interesting companies.
This first phase is discovery without judgement. You should take
ideas from everywhere and generate a pile of ideas that folks are
pursuing, even if you think they’re terrible.
Once your pile of ideas has gotten large enough, craft it into a
strategy,15 and then start testing that strategy. Keep refining and
exploring your strategy until you can figure out what the key
decisions are, a kind of ad hoc sensitivity analysis.16 Once you
identify the key pivots in your strategy, you’re finally prepared to
define a direction!
Make a clear decision on each of those pivots, write up a document
explaining those decisions, and then see if you can get anyone to
read it. They’ll disagree with a lot of what you’ve written, or else
they’ll be confused by it. Keep testing, and refine the confusion
down to the smallest group of controversial problems possible.
Once you have those problems, return to your rounds of engaging
with experienced leaders at other companies, and ask them how
they’ve made those trade-offs before. Ask them for their stories.
Ask them for the context that made one path perfect early on, and
why they changed their minds as their company grew larger.

Incorporate everything you’ve
document, and you’re done.

learned

into

your

strategy

Well, almost. The one remaining problem is that almost no one will
have the time to soak up the full detail of your overly precise
document, so the final step is to distill it into something
comprehensible without hours of close reading. I’m still working on
the best way to do this, but I suspect that it’s cutting all
unnecessary, and even most essential, complexity in order to
capture as much of the meaning as possible in three to four bullet
points.

4.9

Close out, solve, or delegate

In a recent chat with an engineering manager, they mentioned a
low-grade, ambient anxiety around their impact, which they’d felt
since moving into a role focused on supporting managers rather
than on leading a team directly. I think that this resonates with
everyone’s transition to managing managers: it’s an unsettling
period when you lose access to what used to make you happy—
partnering directly with a team—and haven’t found new sources of
self-worth in your work.
This isn’t the only reason this transition is hard, it’s also hard
because a lot of your skills and habits stop working well. The skill
that scales the worst is outworking your problems.
This is particularly frustrating, because your ability to put your
head down and solve gritty, important problems was probably a
big part of how you were promoted. Now it’s the wrong answer to
most of your problems. This isn’t because it’s bad behavior, just
because it’s too inefficient to accomplish the breadth and quantity
of things you need to get done.
If you’re sitting at the post-transition moment, detached from the
work you loved, and with your instincts driving you into a pile of
work you can’t make a dent in, I have a tool that’s been useful for
me and might be useful for you!
For every problem that comes your way—an email asking for a
decision, a production problem, a dispute around on-call, a request

to transfer from one team to another—you must pick one of three
options:
Close out. Close it out in a way such that this specific ask is
entirely resolved. This means making a decision and
communicating it to all involved participants. This strategy is a
success if this particular task never comes back to you; and your
goal is to finish this particular task as quickly and as permanently
as possible.
Solve. Design a solution such that you won’t need to spend time
on this particular kind of ask again in the next six months. This is
often designing norms or process, but depending on the kind of
issue, this might be coaching an individual. With this option, your
goal is to finish off an entire category of tasks.
Delegate. Ideally, this is to redirect the ask to someone who is
responsible for that kind of work, but sometimes it is a one-off. If
you can’t close out a task or solve it, your only other option is to
delegate it to someone who either has the specialized skills to
close/solve it, or who can work in the system.
No matter what problem comes your way, you’re not allowed to
solve issues any other way! Give this method a try for a week, and
see if it helps you navigate your role more effectively.

5

CHAPTER 5

Culture

Figure 5.1
Membership in multiple teams: peers, managers, and the supported team.

Culture
When I’m working on a presentation to a large organization, I
spend a great deal of time on framing it properly. There are so
many perspectives that I want my message to resonate with, and
I want folks to walk away humming the right notes. However, in
the long run our measure is not in what we say or how skillfully
we say it, but in what we do, and the abacus tallying our actions
is organizational culture.
Sometimes that tally doesn’t show a result that we’re proud of,
but the good news is that culture evolves. Nonetheless, this
evolution only yields positive change to persistent effort. In this
chapter, we explore some of the persistent efforts I’ve used to
shift culture in organizations that I’ve supported.

5.1

Opportunity and membership

For a long time, I’ve found the idea of fostering an inclusive
organization to be somewhat intimidating. For most tasks, I’ve
been able to plan out a roadmap, identify some reasonable metrics,
and get to work, but for inclusion I was apt to stare at the blank
page, filled with uncertainty.
Since then, I’ve found a framework for thinking about inclusion
efforts that is simple but that has allowed me to think about the
problem broadly, identify useful programs, and move from anxiety
to implementation. The basis: an inclusive organization is one in
which individuals have access to opportunity and membership.
Opportunity is having access to professional success and
development. Membership is participating as a version of
themselves that they feel comfortable with.
I’ve found this framework powerful for reflecting on what is going
well and where we can improve, and I hope you’ll find it useful as
well. For both themes, I’ve written notes on investment and
measurement.

5.1.1 Opportunity
There are workplaces where everyone around you is delightful, the
customers are friendly, and you feel respected, but you still return
home each night dissatisfied. Occasionally an interesting project
will come up, but those typically go to more tenured folks. When I

think about having access to opportunity, I think about ensuring
that folks can go home most days feeling fulfilled by challenge and
growth.
The most effective way to provide opportunity to the members of
your organization is through the structured application of good
process. Good process is as lightweight as possible, while being
rigorous enough to consistently work. Structure application allows
folks to learn how the processes work, and lets them build trust by
watching the consistent, repeated application of those processes.
As the saying goes, this is simple to do but far from easy. The key
question is whether you’ll continue to respect your processes when
it’s inconvenient to do so. If one of your best team members wants
a specific opportunity, are you willing to run an open application
process? What if they plan to leave your company otherwise?
Would you be willing to bypass your processes to keep them?
There are infinite ways to create and distribute opportunity! Some
of the programs that I have found more helpful are:
1. Rubrics everywhere. Every important people decision should
have a rubric around how folks are evaluated. This is true for
promotions, performance designations, hiring, transitions into
management, and pretty much everything else!
2. Selecting project leaders.1 Having a structured approach to
selecting project leads allows you to learn from previous
selections, and to ensure that you’re not concentrating
opportunity on a small set of individuals.

3. Explicit budgets. Many companies take a “spend it like your
own money” approach to budgets, which often leads to large
inconsistencies across individuals. Instead of saying that you’ll
pay for teams to attend a reasonable number of conferences
per year, specify a fixed number. Instead of maintaining a
general ongoing education budget, make it explicit.
4. Nudge involvement. Many people are uncomfortable
applying to opportunities, using education budgets, asking for
mentorship, etc. It’s very effective to reach out to those folks
directly and recommend they apply. Even more powerful is
showing them where they fall on a distribution: it’s one thing to
know that you’ve never used your education budget, and
something else entirely to know that you’re the only person
who isn’t using it.
5. Education programs. Create ongoing training and learning
programs that are available for everyone, or, for example, for
all managers.
I’m pretty confident that these measures will significantly improve
the distribution of and access to opportunity, but we can do better.
We can measure. I’ve found measurability of opportunity to be
surprisingly high, which is one of the reasons I think it’s an effective
pillar in thinking about inclusion.
The metrics that have been useful for me:
1. Retention is the most important measure of availability of
opportunity, although it’s also a very lagging indicator. This
should be the first thing you’re paying attention to, but you
must recognize that it’s slow to show change.
2

2. Usage rate is how often folks get picked in project selection.2
The number of distinct team members picked to lead critical
projects is a particularly interesting measure.
3. Level distribution is useful, in particular comparing cohorts of
folks with different backgrounds. People want role models for
themselves in senior roles at the company where they work,
which is why looking at the representation of
underrepresented minorities and women is only a start. You
also want to look in each role and level of seniority.
4. Time at level is how long team members wait between
promotions. How does this compare across cohorts?
Something to watch for is that this number is also greatly
influenced by initial level at hiring. For example, time at level
might look equivalent because some cohorts are being underleveled at time of hire.
Getting access to some of this data will require partnering with
your human resources team, but I’ve found that friendly
persistence, along with sharing your thinking behind the asks,
works well to get coworkers working with you.

5.1.2 Membership
Membership is a bit harder to measure, but equally important. I can
remember once having coffee with a coworker who described their
daily calculus of trying to find someone to eat lunch with. Their
work was generally going well, but each day, as noon approached,
what they thought about most was feeling lonely.

If you’re spending so much energy wondering whom you’ll eat
lunch with, that’s energy you can’t spend being creative. If the idea
of going to work gives you anxiety, at some point you’re going to
decide to stop coming. Membership is the precondition to
belonging.
The programs I’ve found most impactful here:
1. Recurring weekly events allow coworkers to interact socially.
These are held during working hours, are open to folks from
many different teams to attend, and are optional. One of my
personal favorites is hosting a paper-reading group.3
2. Employee Resource Groups (ERGs) create opportunities for
folks with similar backgrounds to build community.
3. Team offsites once a quarter or so are a good chance to
pause, reflect, and work together differently. Spending a day
together learning and discussing is surprisingly effective at
making individuals feel like a team. This is particularly true for
groups of managers, whose daily cadence is typically more in
tune with their teams than with their peers.
4. Coffee chats, perhaps randomly assigned by Donut,4 get folks
from different teams interacting when they don’t need
something from each other.
5. Team lunches give folks time to relax a bit and interact
socially. Held once a week or so, they can become a pleasant
ritual. These can be a bit risky, at least for folks (like early
hires) who feel uncomfortable in their team. Navigating the

social mores of an entire team can be much more difficult than
in a one-on-one.
These programs are all simple, and their simplicity can hide the
degree of thoughtful care necessary to do them well. Depending on
where a team or organization is, you’ll have to adjust your
approach to make them effective. Always take the extra day to test
your implementation proposal with a variety of coworkers.
As you roll these out, measuring remains extremely important,
although I’ve found membership rather harder to measure than
opportunity. Here are some of the potential measures:
1. Retention is once again the golden measure, and once again a
long-trailing indicator.
2. Referral rate by cohort provides insight into which individuals
feel comfortable asking their friends and previous coworkers to
join the company.
3. Attendance rates for recurring events and team lunches
provide some insight into whether folks feel comfortable with
those groups.
4. The quantity and completion rate of coffee chats are
automatically measured with Donut.
Just as when you collect the data to measure opportunity, this will
require some partnership with human resources, but it’s well worth
the effort.
A second similarity between the two is that balancing opportunities
for membership across a large population is pretty tricky. Many

activities and events don’t work well for everyone—meals can be
difficult for individuals with complex dietary restrictions, physical
activities make some uncomfortable, activities after working hours
can exclude parents—and success here requires both a broad
portfolio of options and a willingness to balance concerns across
events and time.

5.1.3 Keep going
Combine efforts on opportunity and membership, and you will find
yourself solidly on the path to an inclusive organization. This
strategy doesn’t have much flash, but results are louder than
proclamations. The most important thing is continuing your
investment over the long term. Pick a few things that you are able
to sustainably continue, get started, and layer in more as you build
steam.

5.2

Select project leads

Have you ever worked at a company where the same two people
always got the most important projects? Me too. It’s frustrating to
watch these opportunities to learn from the sidelines, and reliance
on a small group can easily limit a company’s throughput as it
grows. This is so important that I’ve come to believe that having a
wide cohort of coworkers who lead critical projects is one of the
most important signifiers of good organizational health.
It’s a particularly powerful metric because it simultaneously
measures the company’s capability to execute projects and the
extent that its members have access to growth. The former
measurement helps determine the company’s potential
throughput, and the latter correlates heavily with inclusivity.
In this context, there are two kinds of projects: critical projects and
everything else. Critical projects are scarce. There are more people
who want them than can get access to them. Other projects are
abundant. You might not be able to get one immediately, but if you
wait a month or two the odds are good. There’s no need to be
structured about abundant projects!
To increase the number of folks leading this kind of project, I’ve
iterated into a structured process that has worked quite well:
1. Define the project’s scope and goals in a short document.
Particularly important are identifying:

Time commitment. People need to decide if they must ask
permission from their managers.
Requirements to apply. If there are no requirements, say
so explicitly; otherwise, a lot of folks will assume that there
are, and will opt out.
Selection criteria. If multiple individuals apply, how will
you select the project leader between them?
2. Announce the project to a public email list, at an all-hands,
over Slack, or however your company does persistent
communication; I tend to use email for these. What’s most
important is that you:
Allow folks to apply in private. Some individuals will be
uncomfortable applying in public.
Make sure that applicants don’t see who else has applied.
Some people will see someone they view as senior apply,
and will immediately disengage because they feel that
they are less qualified.
Give at least three working days for people to apply. Do
this whenever possible, as some folks will need to talk with
their manager or peers to muster up the confidence to
apply.
3. Nudge folks to apply who you think would be good candidates
but who might not self-select. This is particularly important for
getting new people into the process.

4. Select a project leader based on the selection criteria you
specified. Take the time to consider every single applicant
against the criteria, and, if possible write up a paragraph or two
about each of them. Once you’ve selected the leader, privately
reach out to them to confirm that they’re able to commit.
5. Sponsor the project leader by finding someone who has
successfully completed a similar project to be their advisor.
This sponsor will be accountable for coaching the leader to
successful completion. This is a great learning opportunity for
sponsors, as they are typically folks who are great at doing
things themselves, but not as used to teaching others how to
lead large and ambiguous projects.
6. Notify other individuals who applied that they were not
selected. It’s extremely helpful if you provide them feedback
on why you didn’t select them. Sometimes it’s because they’ve
already done something great and you want to create room for
another person to learn, and that’s a totally reasonable thing to
tell them!
7. Kick off the project, notifying the same folks who received the
application announcement who the project leader is, who the
sponsor is, and what their plan for running the project is.
8. Record the project, who was selected, and who the sponsor is
into a public spreadsheet. Also link out to a project brief!
If you do this, over time you’ll get a clear sense of who gets leaned
on for the most important projects. If you do this well, you’ll see
that cohort continue to grow!

The first few times you do this, it will feel very constraining and
inefficient. Previously, you would have just sent a ping to a favored
individual and they’d have been off and running, but now you have
to run a slower and more deliberate process. Increasingly, though, I
believe this is the most important change in my approach to
leadership over the past few years. Done well, it can be the
cornerstone in your efforts to grow an inclusive organization.

5.3

Make your peers your first team

While companies are literally composed of teams,5 I’ve found it
surprisingly common to meet folks who feel as if they are not a
member of any team. Managers working directly with engineers
tend to feel some membership in that team, but even the rarest
occasions of authority create a certain distance. Managing
managers lets you pierce the veil a bit more, but the curtain falls
when it comes to performance management or assigning
resources.
Looking toward your peers can be uncomfortable in a different
way. As your span of responsibility grows, you may not know much
of your peers’ work, or you may find yourself frequently contesting
against them for constrained resources. Even when surrounded by
the fastest of growth, you may be awkwardly aware that you’re
aspiring to move into the same, rare, roles.
These dynamics can lead to teams whose camaraderie is at best a
qualified non-aggression pact, and in which collaboration is
infrequent. It’s a strange tragedy that we hold ourselves
accountable for building healthy, functional teams, and yet are so
rarely on them ourselves.
But it can be better. It’s okay to expect more.
I’ve worked on a few teams in which folks consistently looked out
for each other, and believed they’d all come out better together.
These were teams that had individuals willing to disappoint the

teams they managed in order to help their peers succeed. It wasn’t
that these folks were ready to callously disappoint people. Rather,
they balanced outcomes from a broad perspective that included
their peers.
The members of such a team have shifted their first team from the
folks they support to their peers. While these teams are rare, I’ve
come to believe that supporting their creation is simple—albeit
hard—work, and when the conditions are fostered, they lead to an
exceptionally rewarding work environment.
The ingredients necessary for such a team are:
Awareness of each other’s work. Even with the best intentions, a
member cannot optimize for their team if they’re not familiar with
other members’ work. The first step to moving someone’s identity
to their peers is to ensure that they know about their peers’ work.
This will require a significant investment of time, likely in the form
of sharing weekly progress, and the occasional opportunity for
folks to dive deep into each other’s work.
Evolution from character to person. When we don’t know
someone well, we tend to project intentions onto them, casting
them as a character in a play they themselves are unaware exists.
It’s quite challenging to optimize on behalf of characters in your
mental play, but it’s much easier to be understanding of people you
know personally. Spending time together learning about each
other, often at a team offsite, will slowly transform strangers into
people.
Refereeing defection. In game theory, there is an interesting
concept of a dominant strategy. A dominant strategy is one that is

expected to return the maximum value regardless of the actions of
other players. Team collaboration is not a dominant strategy.
Rather, it depends on everyone participating together in good
faith. If you see someone acting against the interests of the team,
you, too, will likely defect to pursue your own self-interest. Some
teams are tightly knit enough that no one ever attempts defection,
but most teams experience frequent changes in membership and
external conditions. I believe that on such teams coordination is
only possible when the manager or a highly respected member
operates as a referee, holding team members accountable for good
behavior.
Avoiding zero-sum culture. Some companies foster zero-sum
cultures, in which perceived success depends on capturing scarce,
metered resources, like head count. It’s hard to convince folks to
coordinate under such conditions. Positive cultures center on
recognizing impact, support, and development, which are all
avenues that support widespread success.
Making it explicit. If you have the first four ingredients, you still
have to explicitly discuss the idea of shifting folks’ identities away
from the team they support and toward the team of their peers. It’s
hard to move membership from the team you spend the most time
with, and I haven’t seen it happen organically.
Given how much energy it takes to shift the identities of a team of
managers away from the folks they support and toward their peers,
I think it’s quite reasonable to question whether it’s genuinely
worth doing it. You’ll be unsurprised to know that I think it is.
As you move into larger roles, you’ll need to start considering
challenges from the perspectives of more teams and people. In this

sense, treating your peers as your first team allows you to begin
practicing your manager’s job, without having to get promoted into
the role first. The more fully you embrace optimizing for your
collective peers, the closer your priorities will mirror your
manager’s. Beyond practicing working from this broader lens, it
will also position you for particularly useful feedback from your
manager, as you’ll both be considering similar problems with
shared goals.
The best learning doesn’t always come directly from your
manager, and one of the most important things a first team does is
provide a community of learning. Your peers can only provide
excellent feedback if they’re aware of your work and are thinking
about your work similarly to how you are. Likewise, as you’re
thinking about your peers’ work, you’ll be able to learn from how
they approach it differently than you anticipate. Soon, your team’s
rate of learning will be the sum of everyone’s challenges, no longer
restricted to just your own experiences.
Long term, I believe that your career will be largely defined by
getting lucky and the rate at which you learn. I have no advice
about luck, but to speed up learning I have two suggestions: join a
rapidly expanding company, and make your peers your first team.
Jason Wong’s “Building a First Team Mindset”6 is an excellent
read on this theme if you’re looking for more!

5.4

Consider the team you have for senior
positions

Over the past six months, I’ve been hiring engineering managerofmanagers roles. These roles are scarcer than line management
roles, and they vary more across companies. This process has
taught me a bunch of new things.
Manager-of-managers searches are interesting in at least four
ways:
There are many folks who can’t find upward mobility within
their current company. They have not managed managers
before, and are looking for the opportunity.
Most people with experience managing managers are happy in
their current roles.
The individuals interested in these roles outpace supply. This
makes it more important to put in place processes like the
Rooney Rule.7
You need a fair way to consider candidates within your
company. It must be respectful to them yet allow you to uphold
your responsibilities to the company.
The last aspect what has taught me the most, and what I want to
focus on. Ensuring that internal candidates take part is essential to
an inclusive culture. Fair consideration doesn’t mean that we

prefer internal candidates. Rather, it means that there is a
structured way for them to apply, and for us to consider them.
Letting individuals apply is the easy part. You must announce each
position and ask for internal candidates. You should persuade
eligible candidates to apply, especially if they are uncertain. You
should give them a week or two to consider whether they want to
apply.
Then comes the trickier part: evaluation. We’ve focused on testing
these categories:
1. Partnership. Have they been effective partners to their peers,
and to the team that they’ve managed?
2. Execution. Can they support the team in operational
excellence?
3. Vision. Can they present a compelling, energizing vision of the
future state of their team and its scope?
4. Strategy. Can they identify the necessary steps to transform
the present into their vision?
5. Spoken and written communication. Can they convey
complicated topics in both written and verbal communication?
Can they do all this while being engaging and tuning the level
of detail to their audience?
6. Stakeholder management. Can they make others, especially
executives, feel heard? Can they make these stakeholders feel
confident that they’ll address any concerns?

This evaluation doesn’t cover every aspect of being an effective
senior leader. But it does cover the raw skills that form the
foundation of one’s success. You already know if an internal
candidate has hired managers. You know if they’ve done
organization design. There’s no need to ask all that.
To test these categories, we’re using these tools:
Peer and team feedback. Collect written feedback from four or
five coworkers. Include peers on other teams. Include people the
applicants have managed. Include people they would not have
managed. My biggest advice? Lean into controversial feedback,
not away from it. Listen to would-be dissenters, and hear their
concerns.
A 90-day plan. The applicant writes a 90-day plan of how they’d
transition into the role, and what they would focus on. They
emphasize specific tactics, time management, and where they’d
put their attention. This is also a great opportunity to understand
their diagnosis of the current situation. Provide written feedback to
them on their plan. Have them incorporate that feedback into their
plan. This is an opportunity to try out working together in the new
role.
Vision/strategy document. The applicant writes a combined
vision/strategy document. It outlines where the new team will be in
two to three years, and how they’ll steer the team to get there.
Provide written feedback on the document. Have them incorporate
that feedback.
Vision/strategy presentation. Have the applicant present their
vision/strategy document to a group of three to four peers. Have

the peers ask questions, and see how the applicant responds to
this feedback.
Executive presentation. Have the applicant present their
strategy document, one-on-one, with an executive. In particular,
test for their ability to adapt communication to different
stakeholders.
Running the process takes a lot of time, but it’s rewarding time. In
fact, this has generated more useful feedback than anything else
I’ve done over the past year. It brings an element of intentional
practice that’s uncommon in engineering management. Folks get
to take risks in their plans. You get to give direct feedback without
risk of micromanagement. It’s been useful enough that I’m now
figuring out whether we can use a similar format for training
managers.
Know that internal processes are awkward. You’ll have many
internal candidates. They will talk to each other. They will interview
external candidates for a role they are applying for themselves.
One candidate may end up managing the others. Don’t decide to
avoid this morass of awkwardness. You can’t. You’re deferring it
until later. It’ll still be awkward, but now awkwardly in the realm of
gossip.
Running this process, and enduring the awkwardness in doing so,
is the most rewarding thing I’ve done as a manager. I recommend
it.

5.5

Company culture and managing
freedoms

In 1969, Roger Miller (and later, much more famously, Janis Joplin)
sang:
“Freedom’s just another word for nothing left to lose.” 8
This gives us yet another peculiar entrant toward defining freedom.
Perhaps it’s nothing more than an apologetic9 ode to despair: law
requires consequences, and there are no consequences when
you’ve already been reduced to nothing.
Lousy hooks and confusing segues aside, the topic for discussion
is the relationship between a company’s culture and its freedoms.
Rather than starting down the path of examining the kinship of
freedom and consequence—which is a rather dismal place to begin
anything—we instead look toward kinds of freedom, which
immediately brings us to the distinction between positive and
negative freedoms.10
Positive freedom is your freedom to do: to vote, to wear the
clothing you want, to own arms, to blow smoke into your
neighbor’s porch when they’re trying to read a book outside on a
sunny day. Negative freedom is your freedom from things: from
being forced to take an impossible literacy exam before being
allowed to vote, from to wear clothing you dislike or find
oppressive, from having your cellular traffic recorded, from having

your neighbors blow smoke onto your porch when you’re trying to
read a book outside on a sunny day.
Wielding this distinction, “freedom” is neither inherently good nor
inherently just, and descends into the murky gray that already
embroils everything else in our lives. Each positive freedom we
enforce strips away a negative freedom, and each negative
freedom we guarantee eliminates a corresponding positive
freedom. This sad state of affairs is often referred to as the Paradox
of Positive Liberty.11
I believe that the balancing of positive and negative freedoms is a
fundamental task of managers and management. When we’ve
lucked upon (or perhaps nurtured, if you’re much more talented
than I) a phenomenal culture and a great team who are executing
well along a worthy roadmap, then, like a central bank reducing
interest rates to avoid a bubble, or like a jogger reducing their pace
to lower their heart rate, we can carefully ramp toward negative
freedom and away from positive freedom. This is one of our
essential tools for facilitating and prolonging success.
Further down the road, if the structure loses its luster, the economy
shifts around us, or entropy’s endless march throws a wrench into
the machinery, then once again we shift toward positive freedoms,
which gives the organization a greater chance to successfully
adapt to its new circumstances.
Using the two together, management slowly decelerates to keep
the good times rolling, and accelerates to help push through
challenging periods.

Freedom is a loaded term, so it’s easy to deteriorate into a moral
discussion, but in times and topics of great sensitivity, I believe
looking through the lens of system dynamics12 is a valuable
approach. Companies are vastly complicated systems with dozens
of feedback loops, and managing the kind and quality of freedom is
simply another mechanism to be adjusted, albeit with immense
care and consideration.
A few closing tangents. First, Tom DeMarco’s Slack13 has an
excellent suggestion for a good starting state between positive and
negative freedoms for engineering teams: generally follow the
standard operating procedure (i.e., keep doing what you’re already
doing, the way you’re doing it), but always change exactly one
thing for each new project. Perhaps use a new database, a new web
server, a different templating language, a static JavaScript frontend, whatever—but always change exactly one thing.
Second, I’m always terrified of getting on the wrong side of history,
so I’ve spent some time considering how this discussion of
freedoms relates to Ben Horowitz’s recent post on “Can Do vs.
Can’t Do Cultures.”14 I read that article as describing how young
companies that are focused on innovation differ from mature
companies that are trapped in “the innovator’s dilemma.”15 Older
companies can (and do) foster sheltered pockets of innovation, as
in the example of Larry Page investing in good ideas that he
encounters within Google, but maintaining a market position is
fundamentally distinct from creating new markets. I think that the
more complete argument is to use both cultures (and, in parallel, to
place emphasis on positive and negative freedoms) in the
appropriate circumstances.

5.6

Kill your heroes, stop doing it harder

The project launch is 18 months late, company revenue is dropping
significantly, key people are leaving and being replaced by new
hires. What to do? Well, work harder!
Does it work?
Of course not. Unless your problem is that people aren’t trying
hard, the “work harder” mantra only breeds hero programmers
whose heroic ways make it difficult for nonheroes to contribute
meaningfully. Later, as your new heroes finish martyring
themselves on burnout, you’re left with three exceptionally
challenging problems:
1. You’ve bred a cadre of dissatisfied and burned-out heroes.
2. You and your heroes have alienated everyone else.
3. Your project is still totally screwed.
This is a recurring pattern that many growing companies fall into,
and it also happens to projects within larger companies. Anywhere
you find managerial desperation and a hardworking team, “Do It
Harder” may be visiting.

5.6.1 The fall and rise of a hero

One rainy day, you walk into the office and your boss wants to talk
to you. He needs you to finish your project, but he also wants you to
finish your coworker’s project, without the coworker feeling bad
about it, because your coworker is still going to own the project,
you’re just going to do it (along with your other work, remember).
A few weeks later, the site starts crashing every few days, and the
company really needs to launch the new version of the site. The
boss pops in to let you know he deeply trusts you, and needs you to
take over both efforts. You’re a good guy and it sounds like a good
opportunity, and you’re pretty sure that you can do a better job
than the guys already working on it, so you say yes.
Congratulations! You’re a hero programmer.
You’re now working on five disparate projects, trying not to piss
too many people off, but you’re having trouble getting everyone
involved. It seems like they’re not really working as hard as you are,
and it’s a bit of a drag, since you’re pulling 70-hour weeks and
getting paged every Saturday night.
The other developers are glad that you’re taking a lead on the
problems that were terrifying them too, but all is not well. A couple
are quietly bitter because of your newly elevated status, but most
just don’t know how to contribute anymore, because you and your
hero peers are rewriting the existing system, debugging the
outages, and cherry-picking the easy wins. What’s left for them to
do?
Day after day and week after week, the frustration between heroes
and nonheroes grows stronger, tumbling toward inevitable
disaster.

5.6.2 Kill the hero programmer
When it comes to solving the problem of the hero programmer,
your options are limited: either kill the environment that breeds
hero programmers, or kill the hero programmer by burnout.
They’re truly unmaintainable beings, as their presence limits the
effectiveness of those around them in exchange for a short-term
burst of productivity fueled by long hours and minimized
communication costs (minimized because most other people
aren’t able to do much).
These long hours burn your heroes out, and then they either quit or
you shove them into a corner, where they’ll glower at you while
remembering how their hard work and critical contributions
culminated in them glaring at you from that corner.
You can rehabilitate heroes, but it’s touch-and-go from the
beginning, and healing takes time. They might hate you for a while,
and they probably should, because you created them with your
ham-fisted attempt to fix your current problem.

5.6.3 A long time coming, a long time going
One of the observations from systems thinking16 is that, though
humans are prone to interpreting events as causal, often problems
are better described in terms of a series of stockpiles that grow and
shrink based on incoming and outgoing flows. The Dust Bowl17
wasn’t caused by one farmer or one year of overfarming, but by
years of systemic abuse.

Stocks and flows are especially valuable in understanding the
failure of projects and teams. Projects fall behind one sprint at a
time. Technical debt strangles projects over months.
Projects fail slowly—and fixing them takes time, too.
Working at a frenetic pace for a couple of weeks or a month may
feel like a major outpouring of effort and energy, but it’s near
impossible to quickly counteract a deficit created over months of
poor implementation or management choices.
If hard work and breeding heroes doesn’t work, what does?

5.6.4 Resetting broken systems
Your options for addressing a broken system depend on whether
you’re in a position to set policy. If you set the original direction and
have the leverage to change directions, then resetting is as simple
as standing up and taking the bullet for the fiasco you’re embroiled
in.
Taking the blame is painful, and it only plays well with the crowds a
couple of times. After that, people won’t trust you to lead them
toward success, which makes some sense, since at that point
you’ve led them off the rails multiple times. Fair’s fair.
If taking the loss doesn’t leave you looking shiny, at least attaining
closure is healing, and the team will have the opportunity to start
healing as the schedule is reset and goals are adjusted. Without
the leverage to change policy—and this doesn’t have to be direct
authority, for influence is a powerful thing—you can’t start the

healing, but you can help reach the reset point more quickly. (This
is similar to the protagonists’ goal in Isaac Asimov’s Foundation’s
series, as they struggle to accelerate and minimize the collapse of
the Galactic Empire.18)
Without policy, your tool is stepping back and allowing the
brokenness to collapse under its own weight. A deeply flawed
system can’t be saved by band-aids, but it can easily absorb your
happiness to slightly extend its viability. If you step back, you
conserve your energy and avoid creating rifts by pushing others
away in hero mode, and you will be ready to be a part of a new—
hopefully more functional—system after the reset does occur.
This is a very uncomfortable process, and if you’re a hardworking,
loyal person, then it probably goes deeply against your nature. It
certainly goes against my nature, but I believe that this is one case
in which following my nature is a detriment to both myself and
those around me.
Projects fail all the time, people screw up all the time. Usually it’s
by failing to acknowledge missteps that we exacerbate them. If we
acknowledge errors quickly, and cut our losses on bad decisions
before burning ourselves out, then we can learn from our mistakes
and improve.
Kill your heroes and stop doing it harder. Don’t trap yourself in your
mistakes, learn from them and move forward.

6

CHAPTER 6

Careers

Figure 6.1
Relationship of practitioner experience with policies that raise floor or raise ceiling of
expected outcomes.

Careers
Luck plays such an extraordinary role in each individual’s career
progression that sometimes the entire concept of career
planning seems dubious. However, as managers, we have an
outsize influence in reducing the role of luck in the careers of
others. That potential to influence calls us to hold ourselves
accountable for creating fair and effective processes for
interviewing, promoting, and growing the folks we work with.
This chapter explores how we can design effective interviewing
and hiring processes, as well as how we can steer our own
careers while standing on a bedrock of constant change.

6.1

Roles over rocket ships, and why
hypergrowth is a weak predictor of
personal growth

There’s a pervasive trope that people who’ve worked for an
extended period in a large company will struggle to adapt to
working in a smaller company. Work at a company too long, the
theory goes, and you’re too specialized to hire elsewhere. This
belief is reinforced by both age bias1 and the reality that few
companies continue to win the rounds of reinvention necessary to
maintain excellence over time. The pool of once-phenomenal
companies is quite large: Yahoo!, Oracle, and VMware, to name a
few.
If long tenure holds a stigma, what of short tenure? Yep, that’s
stigmatized, too.2 Although, it’s certainly less stigmatized than it
used to be. A fairly consistent belief across companies is that
multiple stints below one year are a bad sign, but, generally as long
as you’ve worked a few years somewhere, then having a career that
is otherwise entirely composed of one-year stints raises few red
flags. While I’m certain that these beliefs are, at best, deeply
flawed, they’ve accidentally become a rule of thumb in my own
career: stay everywhere at least two years, and look for a place
where I could spend four years to serve as the counterweight to my
series of two-year stints. I’ve followed this rule very literally,3
staying at least two years (well, we can all count here, exactly two
years) at each company I’ve worked at, and starting each job with
the hope that this one would be the place I’d make it to four.

To the surprise of no one, it turns out that’s been a pretty terrible
way to think about career planning, and lately I’ve been trying to
find a more useful framework.
Working at a company isn’t a single continuous experience. Rather
it’s a mix of stable eras and periods of rapid change that bridge
between eras. Thriving requires both finding a way to succeed in
each new era and successfully navigating the transitional periods.
You yourself trigger some transitions, like switching companies.
Others happen on their own schedule: a treasured coworker leaves,
your manager moves on, or the company runs out of funding.
Discard the discussion of tenure. Let’s talk about eras and
transitions.

6.1.1 Your new career narrative
Start by building out a map of your past year. Each time there was a
change that meaningfully changed how you work, mark that down
as a transition. These could be your direct manager changing, your
team’s mission being redefined, a major reorganization, whatever
—what counts is if how you work changed. What skills did you rely
on to navigate the transition? What skills did the transition give you
an opportunity to develop?
Next, think about the eras that followed those transitions. How did
the values and expectations change? Did operational toil become
considered critical work? Did work around inclusion and diversity
become first-shift work that got mentioned in performance
reviews? What skills did you depend on the most, and which of
your existing skills fell out of use?

What you just wrote down is your new career narrative, and it’s
much richer than just another year at your company.

6.1.2 Opportunities for growth
The good news is that both the stable eras and the transitions
are great opportunities for growing yourself. Transitions are
opportunities to raise the floor by building competency in new
skills, and in stable periods you can raise the ceiling by developing
mastery in the skills that the new era values. As the cycle repeats,
your elevated floor will allow you to weather most transitions, and
you’ll thrive in most eras by leveraging your expanding masteries.
It’s suggested that mature companies have more stable periods
while startups have a greater propensity for change, but it’s been
my experience that what matters most is the particular team you
join. I’ve seen extremely static startups, and very dynamic teams
within larger organizations. I particularly want to challenge this old
refrain:
“If you’re offered a seat on a rocket ship, don’t ask what seat!
Just get on.”
—Sheryl Sandberg
Even hypergrowth companies tend to have teams that are largely
sheltered from change by either their management or because
they’re too far away from the company’s primary constraints to get
attention.
By tracking your eras and transitions, you can avoid lingering in
any era beyond the point when you’re developing new masteries.

This will allow you to continue your personal growth even if you’re
working in what some would describe as a boring, mature
company. The same advice applies if you’re within a quickly
growing company or startup: don’t treat growth as a foregone
conclusion. Growth only comes from change, and that is
something you can influence.

6.2

Running a humane interview process

No matter how many times you’ve done it, changing companies is
stressful because of the requisite job search and interviewing.
Having conducted hundreds of interviews across a number of
companies, I feel a bit more prepared to interview each time I do it,
but being back on the interviewee’s side of the table always leaves
me humbled.
I’m confident that the state of interviewing is improving: many
processes now involve a prepared presentation on a technical topic
instead of an impromptu presentation (this more closely replicates
a real work task), and many have replaced the whiteboard
algorithm problem with a period of collaborative pair programming
on a laptop with your editor of choice.
Looking back on my early interviewing experiences, when I was
once asked to do calculus on the whiteboard, I’m amazed at how
far things have improved.
That said, it’s certainly not the case that interviewing has improved
uniformly. There is still a lot of whiteboard programming out there,
and a disproportionate number of the most desirable companies
continue with the practice due to the combined power of inertia (it
was the state of play when many engineers and managers—
including myself—entered the profession) and coarse-grained
analytics (if you’re hitting your hiring goals—and with enough
dedicated sourcers, any process will hit your hiring goals—then it
can be hard to prioritize improving your process).

Reflecting on the interviews I’ve run over the past few years and
those I got to experience recently, I believe that, while interviewing
well is far from easy, it is fairly simple.
1. Be kind to the candidate.
2. Ensure that all interviewers agree on the role’s requirements.
3. Understand the signal your interview is checking for (and how
to search that signal out).
4. Come to your interview prepared to interview.
5. Deliberately express interest in candidates.
6. Create feedback loops for interviewers and the loop’s
designer.
7. Instrument and optimize as you would any conversion funnel.
You don’t have to do all of these to be effective! Start from being
nice and slowly work your way through to the analytics.

6.2.1 Be kind
A good interview experience starts with being kind to your
candidate.
Being kind comes through in the interview process in a hundred
different ways. When an interview runs overtime before you get to
the candidate’s questions, the kind thing to do is to allow the
candidate a few minutes to ask questions, instead of running on to

the next interview to catch up. Likewise, in that scenario the kind
thing is to then negotiate new staggered start times, rather than
kicking off a cascade of poor interviewer time management as each
person tries to fractionally catch up to the original schedule.
My experience is that you can’t conduct a kind, candidate-centric
interview process if your interviewers are tightly time-constrained.
Conversely, if an interviewer is unkind to a candidate (and these
unkindnesses are typically of the “with a whisper not a bang”
variety), I believe it is very often a structural problem with your
interviewing process, and not something you can reliably dismiss
as an issue with that specific interviewer.
Almost every unkind interviewer I’ve worked with has been either
suffering from interview burnout after doing many interviews per
week for many months or has been busy with other work to the
extent that they have started to view interviews as a burden rather
than a contribution. To fix that, give them an interview sabbatical
for a month or two, and make sure that their overall workload is
sustainable before moving them back into the interview rotation.
Identifying interview burnout is also one of the areas where having
a strong relationship with open communication between
engineering managers and recruiters is important. Having two sets
of eyes looking for these signals helps.

6.2.2 What role is this, anyway?
The second critical step toward an effective interview loop is
ensuring that everyone agrees on the role they are interviewing for,
and what extent of which skills that role will require.

For some roles—especially roles that vary significantly between
companies, like engineering managers, product managers, or
architects—this is the primary failure mode for interviews, and
preventing it requires reinforcing expectations during every
candidate debrief in order to ensure interviewers are “calibrated.”
I’ve found that agreeing on the expected skills for a given role can
be far harder than anyone anticipates, and it can require spending
significant time with your interviewers to agree on what the role
requires. (This is often in the context of what extent and kind of
programming experience is needed in engineering management,
DevOps, and data science roles.)

6.2.3 Finding signal
After you’ve broken the role down into a certain set of skills and
requirements, the next step is to break your interview loop into a
series of interview slots that together cover all of those signals.
Typically, each skill is covered by two different interviewers to
create some redundancy in signal detection, in case one of the
interviews doesn’t go cleanly.
Just identifying the signals you want is only half of the battle,
though; you also need to make sure that the interviewer and the
interview format actually expose that signal. It really depends on
the signal you’re looking for, but a few of the interview formats that
I’ve found very effective are:
1. Prepared presentations on a topic. Instead of asking the
candidate to explain some architecture on the spur of the
moment, give them a warning before the interview that you’ll

ask them to talk about a given topic for 30 minutes, which is a
closer approximation of what they’d be doing on the job.
2. Debugging or extending an existing codebase on a laptop
(ideally on their laptop). This is much more akin to the day-today work of development than writing an algorithm on the
board. A great problem can involve algorithmic components
without coming across as a pointless algorithmic question.
(One company I spoke with had me implement a full-stack
auto-suggest feature for a search inbox, which required
implementing a prefix tree, but the interviewer avoided
framing it as yet another algo question.)
3. Giving demos of an existing product or feature (ideally the one
they’d be working on.) This task helps them learn more about
your product and get a sense of whether they have interest
around what you’re doing, and it helps you get a sense of how
they deliver feedback and criticism.
4. Roleplays (operating off a script that describes the situation.)
This option can be pretty effective if you can get the
interviewers to buy into it, allowing you to get the candidate to
create more realistic behavior (architecting a system together,
giving feedback on poor performance, running a client
meeting, and so on).
More than saying that you should specifically try these four
approaches (but you should!), the key point is to keep trying new
and different approaches that improve your chance of finding
signal from different candidates.

6.2.4 Be prepared
If you know the role you’re interviewing for and know the signal
which your interview slot is listening for, then the next step is
showing up prepared to find that signal. Being unprepared is, in my
opinion, the cardinal interview sin, because it shows a disinterest in
the candidate’s time, your team’s time, and your own time. When I
recall the fortunately rare situations when I’ve been interviewed by
someone who was both rude and unprepared, I still remember the
unprepared part first and the rude part second.
I’ve also come to believe that interview preparedness is much more
company-dependent than it is individual-dependent. Companies
that train interviewers (more on that below), prioritize interviewing,
and maintain a survivable interview-per-week load tend to do very
well, and other companies just don’t.
Following from this, if you find that your interviewers are typically
unprepared, it’s probably a structural problem for you to iterate on
improving and not a personal failing of your interviewers.

6.2.5 Deliberately express interest
Make sure your candidates know that you’re excited about them.
I first encountered this idea reading Rands’s “Wanted” article,4
and he does an excellent job of covering it there. The remarkable
thing is how few companies and teams do this intentionally: in my
last interviewing process, three of the companies I spoke with

expressed interest exceptionally well, and those three companies
ended up being the ones I engaged with seriously.
Whenever you extend an offer to a candidate, have every
interviewer send a note to them saying that they enjoyed the
interview. (Compliment rules apply: more detailed explanations are
much more meaningful.) At that point, as an interviewer, it can be
easy to want to get back to your “real job,” but resist the
temptation to quit closing just before you close: it’s a very powerful
human experience to receive a dozen positive emails when you’re
pondering if you should accept a job offer.

6.2.6 Feedback loops
Interviewing is not a natural experience for anyone involved. With
intentional practice you’ll slowly get better, but it’s also easy to
pick up poor interviewing habits (asking brainteaser questions) or
keep using older techniques (whiteboard coding). As mentioned
earlier, even great interviewers can become poor when
experiencing interview burnout or when they are overloaded with
other work.
The fix for all these issues is to ensure that you build feedback
loops into your process, both for the interviewers and for the
designer of the interview process. Analytics (discussed in the next
section) are powerful for identifying broad issues, but pair
interviews, practice interviews, and weekly sync-ups between
everyone strategically involved in recruiting (depending on your
company’s structure, this might be recruiters and engineering

managers, or something else) work best to actively improve your
process.
For pair interviews, have a new interviewer (even if they are
experienced somewhere else!) start by observing a more
experienced interviewer for a few sessions, and then gradually take
on more of the interview until eventually the more senior candidate
is doing the observing. Since your goal is to create a consistent
experience for your candidates, this is as important for new hires
who are experienced interviewing elsewhere as it is for a new
college grad.
To get the full benefit of calibration and feedback, after the
interview have each interviewer write up their candidate feedback
independently before the two discuss the interview and candidate
together. Generally, I’m against kibitzing about a candidate before
the group debrief, in order to reduce bias in later interviews based
on an earlier one, but I think this is a reasonable exception since
you’ve experienced the same interview together. Also, in a certain
sense, calibrating on interviewing at your company is about having
a consistent bias in how you view candidates, independently of
who on your team interviews them.
Beyond the interviewers getting feedback, it’s also critical that the
person who owns or designs the interview loop get feedback. The
best place to get that is from the candidate and from the interview
debrief session.
For direct feedback from candidates, I’ve started to ask every
candidate during my “manager interview” sessions how the
process has been and what we could do to improve. The feedback
is typically surprisingly candid, although many candidates aren’t

really prepared to answer the question after five hours of
interviews. (It’s easy to get into the mode of surviving the
interviews rather than thinking critically about the process that is
being used to evaluate you.) The other, more common, mechanism
is to have the recruiters do a casual debrief with each candidate at
the end of the day.
Both of these mechanisms are tricky because candidates are often
exhausted and the power dynamics of interviewing work against
honest feedback. Maybe we should start proactively asking every
candidate to fill out an anonymous Glassdoor review on their
interview experience. That said, this is definitely a place where
starting to collect some feedback is more important than trying to
get it perfect in the first pass, so start collecting something and go
from there.

6.2.7 Optimize the funnel
Once you have the basics down, the final step of building a process
that remains healthy for the long haul is instrumenting the process
at each phase (sourcing, phone screens, take-home tests, onsites,
offers, and so on) and monitoring those metrics over time. If your
ratio of sourced referrals to direct ones goes down, then you
probably have a problem (specifically, probably a morale problem
in your existing team). And if your acceptance rate goes down,
then perhaps your offers are not high enough, but it also might be
that your best interviewer has burned out on interviewing and is
pushing people away.

Keep watching these numbers and listening to candidate postprocess feedback, and you can go to sleep at night knowing that
the process is still on the rails.
As a side note: I’ve put optimizing your funnel—and by this I
include the entire process of building explicit analytics around your
process—as the last priority in building a great interviewing
process. From a typical optimization perspective, you should
always measure first and optimize second, and here I’m giving the
opposite advice.
Doing this first instead of last is definitely reasonable. In fact, I
considered making this the first priority, and when I was setting up
my last hiring process it was the first thing I did. In the end, I think
you’ll find that your process cannot thrive without handling the first
six priorities, and that your analytics will direct you toward fixing
those issues. Plus, the underlying data is very often poor, and it can
be easy to get lost spending your cycles on instrumenting your
process instead of improving it.
Altogether, the most important aspect to interviewing well is to
budget enough time and to maintain a healthy skepticism about
the efficiency of your current process. Keep iterating forward and
your process will end up being a good one.

Figure 6.2
The phases of a hiring funnel.

6.3

Cold sourcing: hire someone you don’t
know

The three biggest sources of candidates are referrals from your
existing team, inbound applicants who apply on your jobs page,
and sourced candidates whom you proactively bring into your
funnel.
Small companies tend to rely on referrals, and large companies
tend to rely on sourcing candidates, using dedicated recruiting
sourcers for whom this is their full-time job (often the first rung on a
recruiter career ladder). Medium-sized companies are somewhere
on the continuum between those extremes. (Slack, in particular,
has done some interesting work to encourage inbound applicants,
and while they’re now getting to the size at which most companies
depend more heavily on sourced and direct applicants, I suspect
that inbound applicants are not their largest source of candidates.)
Hiring and recruiting teams tend to prefer referrals because they
often have higher pass and accept rates, and most early-stage
companies, especially those without dedicated recruiting
functions, end up being primarily composed of referrals. (An
interesting caveat: lately I’m seeing more of a second category of
referral candidate: those who are running their own extremely
systematic interviewing process, with the aim of getting offers from
three or more companies. Consequently, these folks tend to have
much lower acceptance rates.)

Figure 6.3
Small companies rely most on referrals, and larger companies on sourced candidates.

Referrals come with two major drawbacks.
The first is that your personal network will always be quite small,
especially when you consider the total candidate pool. This is
especially true early in your career, but it’s easy to work for a long
time without building up a large personal network if you work in a
smaller market or at a series of small companies. (One of the side
benefits of working at a large company early in your career, beyond
name recognition, is kickstarting your personal network.)
The other issue is that folks tend to have relatively uniform
networks, composed of the individuals they went to school with or
worked with. By hiring within those circles, it’s easy to end up with

a company whose employees think, believe, and sometimes even
look similar.

6.3.1 Moving beyond your personal networks
Many hiring managers freeze up when their referral network starts
to dry up, or as they look to bring a wider set of backgrounds onto
their teams. However the good news is that there is a simple
answer: cold sourcing. Cold sourcing, a technique that’s also
common in some kinds of sales, is reaching out directly to people
you don’t know.

Figure 6.4
Small personal networks relative to total pool.

If you’re introverted, this will probably be an extremely unsettling
experience at first, with questions like “What if they’re annoyed by
my email?” and “What if I’m wasting their time?” ringing in your
head. These are important questions, and we have an obligation to
be thoughtful about how we inject ourselves into others’ lives. I was
personally paralyzed by this concern initially, but ultimately I think
it was unfounded: a concise, thoughtful invitation to discuss a job
opportunity is an opportunity, not an infringement, especially for
those who are on career networking sites like LinkedIn. Most folks
will ignore you (which is great), others will politely demur (also
great), a few will actually respond (even greater), and a surprising
number will ignore you for six months and then pop up mentioning
that they’re starting a new job search. I’ve never had someone
respond unkindly.
The other great thing about cold sourcing is that it’s pretty
straightforward. I’ll share the approach I’ve used, with the caveat
that I believe there are a tremendous number of different
approaches that are probably more effective. Take this as a good
starting point, track your results, and then experiment!

Figure 6.5
Three-degree network.

6.3.2 Your first cold sourcing recipe
My standard approach to cold sourcing is:
1. Join LinkedIn. I suspect variations of this technique would
work on other networks (e.g., GitHub), but the challenge is
that folks on other networks are generally not looking to
engage about employment opportunities, and intent increases
response rate significantly! A good parallel here is search
versus display advertising, where search advertising has clickthrough rates that are an order of magnitude higher, as
candidates are actually searching for what is being advertised.
2. Build out your network by following individuals you actually
do know. Add everyone that you went to school with, have
worked with, have interacted with on Twitter, etc. It’s

important to seed your network with some people you know
because it’ll increase the reach of your second-degree
network, and it’ll also reduce the rate at which folks mark you
as someone they don’t know (which is an input to being
penalized as a spammer).
3. Be patient. If your initial network is small, it’s very likely that
you’ll get throttled pretty frequently. Once you’re throttled
(you’ll get a message along the lines of “You’ve exceeded your
search capacity for this month”), you’ll have to wait for a few
days, potentially until the next month, to unthrottle.
Alternatively, you could sign up for their premium products,
which would accelerate this quite a bit. It may take weeks or
months of occasional effort (schedule an hour each week) to
get your network large enough that you’re able to perform
more than a few searches without rate limiting. Anecdotally,
the number of connections at which things seem to get easier
is around 600 or so.
4. Use the search function to identify second-degree
connections to connect to. Start out by searching in your
second-degree network by job title—software engineer or
engineering manager—and as your network expands, consider
switching from title to company. (Consider the various lists of
great companies5 in order to find companies to search by.)
Build a broad church of connections! Even people whom you
don’t reach out to now are folks who might reach out to you
later, or whom you might reach out to in a few months as your
hiring priorities change. If you’re not sure, just go ahead and
do it.

5. When someone accepts your connection request, grab their
email address from their profile and send them a short, polite
note inviting them to coffee or a phone call, and sharing with
them a link to your job description. Experiment with varying
degrees of customization. (If you’re having trouble finding
their email, make sure you click Show more in their Contact
and Personal Info section, and that they’re a first-degree
connection. A few folks don’t share their email at all, and in
that case I’d recommend moving on. Alternatively, you could
send them a LinkedIn message directly.) I’ve personally found
that customization matters less than I assumed, because
people mostly choose to respond based on their
circumstances, not on the quality of your note. (As a caveat,
it’s possible to write bad notes that discourage folks from
responding. Iterating on your reach-out notes and getting a
few other individuals with different perspectives to review your
note is a quick and high-leverage thing to do.)
Your reach-out notes can be very straightforward:
Hi $THEIR_NAME,
I’m an engineering manager at $COMPANY,
and think you would be a great fit for
$ROLE (link to your job description).
Would you be willing to grab a coffee or
do a phone call to discuss sometime in the
next week?
Best,

$YOUR_NAME
Really, I think it can be that simple! If that seems too simple,
then run an A/B test with something more personalized or
sophisticated.
It’s worth noting that you will end up connecting with some
folks whom you simply don’t have a great fit for right now.
That’s okay. I recommend reviewing their profile pretty
rigorously after they accept your connection, and making an
honest assessment on fit. If you don’t have something, that’s
okay, and it’s a better use of the candidate’s time to not reach
out to them. (However, I also think we tend to over-filter on
qualities that don’t matter too much! Being respectful of the
candidate’s time is, in my opinion, the most important thing to
optimize for.)
6. Schedule and enjoy your coffees and chats, and remember
that even people you aren’t able to work with now are still folks
you’re likely to work with next year or next job. Especially in
Silicon Valley, it’s a very small network, and you should
interact with each person as if they’ll be providing feedback on
whether or not to hire you at your next job. (They very well
might!) You have two goals for each of these calls or coffees:
figure out if there is a good mutual fit between the candidate
and the role, and, if there is a good fit, try to get them to move
forward with your process. The three things I find most useful
to individuals deciding deciding to move forward with our
process are describing why I personally am excited about the
company and role we’re discussing, explaining how our
process works (from our initial chat all the way to them

receiving an offer) and then leaving ample time for them to ask
questions.
7. Keep spending an hour each week adding more connections
and following up with folks who have connected. It’s a bit of a
grind at times, but it’s definitely a practice that rewards
consistency. I’ve found that this is a good activity to do
together! Have a weekly meeting of coworkers who come
together and source, chatting about how you’re evolving your
search. This also helps folks overcome their initial discomfort
with cold reach-outs. (It’s worth pointing out that this process
is much easier to do with an applicant tracking system (ATS)
like Lever6 or Greenhouse,7 which allow you to have a single
place to track whether a candidate has already been contacted
by someone else at your company. Having a bunch of folks
from the same company reach out around the same time can
paint a picture of chaos.)
If you’ve read through this and are quite confident that this
approach won’t work, I’m with you: before I tried it, I was similarly
certain that it wouldn’t work for me, and that it was just a big waste
of time. But I’ve slowly been converted. It’s also important to
recognize that it’s very likely this exact approach won’t perform
well over time. So try something simple, push through the
concerns that block you from starting, and then experiment with
different approaches.

6.3.3 Is this high-leverage work?

Similarly, a frequent follow-up question is whether sourcing is a
high-leverage task for engineering managers. I think it is:
candidates are more excited to chat with someone who’d be
managing them than they are to chat with a recruiter whom they’ll
mostly work with during the interview process. Likewise, I think it’s
a valuable signal showing that managers care about hiring enough
to invest their personal energy and attention into it.
That said, I would be cautiously concerned if an engineering
manager was spending more than an hour a week on sourcing (not
including follow-up chats, as those will take up a bunch more time).
There is also a lot of important work to be done closing and
evaluating candidates well, in addition to the numerous nonhiring-related opportunities to be helpful.
As a closing thought, the single clearest indicator of strong
recruiting organizations is a close, respectful partnership between
the recruiting and engineering functions. Spending some time cold
sourcing is a great way to build empathy for the challenges that
recruiters face on a daily basis, and it’s also an excellent
opportunity to learn from the recruiters you partner with! We’ve
been doing weekly cold sourcing meetings as a partnership
between our engineering managers and engineering recruiters,
and it’s been a great forum for learning, empathy-building, and, of
course, hiring.

Figure 6.6
The phases of your recruiting pipeline.

6.4

Hiring funnel

Most companies believe that they are constrained by funding,
product-market fit, or hiring. Books have been written about each
of those, and this will be a foray into hiring. In particular, it’ll be a
look at how to use the fundamental hiring diagnostic tool: the
hiring funnel.

6.4.1 Funnel fundamentals
The hiring funnel consists of four major steps: identifying
candidates, motivating them to apply, evaluating them for your
company, and closing them on joining. Depending on your
particular circumstances, any or all of these can be very
challenging.

• Identify
Candidates tend to come from three large buckets: inbound,
sourced, and referrals. Slower-growing and early companies tend
to rely heavily on referrals, whereas fast-growing companies tend
to exhaust their supply of referrals and to rely more heavily on
sourcing and inbound.
Inbound are candidates who apply to you directly. These come
from your jobs website, often administered using an applicant

tracking system like Greenhouse or Lever, or from job postings
on LinkedIn and other job sites. Inbound tends to be high
volume and low quality. The exception is for companies with
powerful external brands, typically the culmination of strong
product, reputation, and outreach.
Sourced are candidates whom you proactively find and
engage. The most common approaches are using LinkedIn,
visiting colleges, and networking at conferences and meetups.
Referrals are candidates whom someone at your company
already knows, typically previous coworkers or friends who
attended college together. This tends to be the primary source
of hires for smaller companies. At most companies, referrals
are the most efficient source of candidates, sporting the
highest rate of interviews that lead to job offers.

• Motivate
Once you’ve identified candidates you want to consider joining
with your company, you need to motivate them to come interview!
Some companies prefer to view this phase as a filter to weed out
folks who are insufficiently passionate about their work, but I’ve not
found that approach very effective. Rather, that approach seems to
mostly filter for candidates willing to represent enthusiasm, as
opposed to finding authentic passion. Instead, the formula that I’ve
found most effective is pretty simple:
Spend time. Have the people the candidate would work with
spend time with them. Grab coffee with them, talk about the

projects they’re working on, and get them excited about
learning from each other.
Clearly define the role. Tell the candidate about what they’d be
doing, being both very honest and a bit optimistic. That is to
say, always give an accurate description of the work, but try to
find the best frame for describing the work.

• Evaluate
Once you’re blessed with individuals who want to consider working
with you, the next phase is to ensure that they’ll be successful
additions to your team. This phase is tricky because you’re
balancing quite a few objectives, some of which are in conflict:
Certainty. You want to be as confident as possible that the
candidate will be a success in your company. Letting
employees go can be hard on morale, and it takes a great deal
of time to do well.
Candidate experience. You want candidates’ motivation to join
your company to increase as they’re evaluated, not decrease.
One of the worst possible outcomes of your hiring funnel is that
you identify folks you want to join your company, but they’re
no longer interested in being part of it.
Efficiency. You also want to minimize the amount of time
invested by both your team and the candidate. How you think
about this can lead to significant asymmetries, such as takehome assignments that require significant candidate time but

little in-house time for evaluation (well, in principle anyway,
since it seems like most folks find take-home assignments
quite slow to review thoroughly).

• Close
This is similar to the motivate phase, but now instead of asking
them to commit a day, you’re asking them to commit a couple
years of their life. Many, many factors come in to play, from
compensation packages to benefits, to making them feel needed.
Because this is the final step, doing well here is an especially
important factor in your funnel efficiency.
When you want to start operationalizing your hiring process, the
first step is to craft a process for how candidates will flow through
this funnel.

6.4.2 Instrument and optimize
Once you have your funnel defined, the second step is to
instrument it! This is the most important argument for adopting a
formal applicant tracking system, which will provide metadata
around your process.
Instrumentation is so important because it allows you to
understand where to focus your efforts. Different companies excel
at different aspects, and even the same company will become
better and worse at different stages over time. The only way to

operate a consistently good hiring funnel is to ground your
attention and efforts in your funnel metrics.
Once you do have the metrics, put your effort where there is the
most room to improve. The first step of this is quite literal, looking
at the conversion rates across each phase and investing. But
what’s slightly less obvious is what the reasonable upper bounds
for each section should be. To answer those questions,
benchmarking against your peer companies is really the only way
to get useful information. If you don’t benchmark, you can find
yourself investing beyond diminishing returns in motivating
candidates to interview, close, etc.
Whenever you have a hiring challenge, start from your
instrumented hiring funnel and work the problem systematically
from there!

Figure 6.7
An extended hiring funnel, including onboarding, impact, and retention.

6.4.3 Extending the funnel
The funnel we describe above is the most common variant, but I’ve
found that a couple small tweaks make it much more powerful.
Instead of ending your funnel at closing candidates, add four more
phases:

Onboard. How long does it take new hires to get up to speed? It’s
pretty tricky to measure this, but since you’re trying to reason
about the population rather than individuals, it’s okay to be a bit
messy. Pick a productivity metric, maybe commits per week, and
see how long it takes for new hires to reach P40 productivity.
That’s a sufficiently good measure for understanding how long it
takes folks to ramp up.
Impact. How impactful are the people that you’re hiring? Again,
that’s a tricky one to measure, but you’re looking to understand
trends, not individuals, so don’t worry about identifying perfect
metrics. A reasonably good proxy here is looking at the
performance rating distribution for new hires based on time since
hiring.
Promote. How long does it take individuals to get promoted after
they’re hired? This is useful for understanding whether employees
have access to opportunity8 within your organization.
Retain. Are the people you hire staying? Fortunately, this one is
pretty easy to track by looking at the people who leave. It is,
however, quite a lagging indicator, since it typically takes years for
folks to leave. Still, I believe that it’s an essential metric to track.
Not many companies extend their hiring funnel this way, but I think
it’s quite useful, reframing hiring from a transactional process into
your organization’s lifeblood. It’s also true that many companies
are very uncomfortable sharing this kind of information widely.
That’s fine. These are indeed quite sensitive numbers, but you
should make sure someone is paying attention to them.

6.5

Performance management systems

The most sacred responsibilities of management are selecting your
company’s role model, identifying who to promote, and deciding
who needs to leave. At small companies these decisions tend to be
fairly ad hoc, but as companies grow these decisions solidify into a
formal performance management system. Many managers try to
engage with these systems as little as possible, which is a shame. If
you want to shape your company’s culture, inclusion,9 or
performance, this is your most valuable entry point.
The number of approaches to performance management is
uncountably vast, but most of them are composed of three
elements:
Career ladders describe the expected evolution an individual will
undergo in their job. For example, a software engineer ladder
might describe expectations of a software engineer, a software
engineer II, a senior software engineer, and a staff engineer.
Performance designations rate individuals’ performance for a
given period against the expectations of their ladder and level.
Performance cycles occur once, twice, or four times a year, with
the goal of assigning consistent performance designations.
The purpose of these combined systems is to focus the company’s
efforts toward activities that help the company succeed. The

output of these efforts is to provide explicit feedback to employees
on how the company values their work.

6.5.1 Career ladders
At the foundation of an effective performance management system
are career ladders, which describe the expected behaviors and
responsibilities for a role. There is significant overhead to each
career ladder that you write and maintain, and also a significant
downside to attempting to group different roles onto a shared
ladder.
What I’ve seen work best is to be tolerant of career ladder
proliferation—really try to make a ladder for each unique role—but
to only invest significant time in refining any given ladder as it
becomes applicable for more employees. As a rule of thumb, any
ladder with more than 10 individuals should probably be fully
fleshed out, but smaller functions can probably survive with
something rough. This works particularly well if you extend an
open invitation to folks in that role to improve their ladder! (As an
aside, I strongly recommend writing a lightweight ladder before
you hire the first person into a given role. The alternatives tend to
work out poorly.)

Figure 6.8
Diagram of a career ladder with multiple levels.

One effective method for reducing the fixed cost of maintaining
ladders is to establish a template and shared themes across every
ladder. Not only does this reduce fixed maintenance costs, it also
focuses the company on a set of common values.
Each ladder is composed of levels, which describe how the role
evolves in responsibility and complexity as the practitioner
becomes more senior. The number of levels appropriate will vary
across ladders, function size, and function age. Most companies
seem to start with three levels and slowly add levels over time,
perhaps adding one every two years. At each level, you’ll want to
specify the expectations across each of your values. Crisp level
boundaries reduce ambiguity when considering whether to
promote an individual across levels.
Crisp boundaries are also important as they provide those on a
ladder a useful mental model of where they are in their journey,
who their peers are, and whom they should view as role models.

The level definitions are quite effective at defining the behaviors
you’ll want in your role models, which are the behaviors you’ll see
everywhere a year or two later.
A good ladder allows individuals to accurately self-access; these
ladders are self-contained and short. A bad ladder is ambiguous
and requires deep knowledge of precedent to apply correctly. If
there is one component of performance management that you’re
going to invest into doing well, make it the ladders: everything else
builds on this foundation.

6.5.2 Performance designations
Once you have the career ladders written, the next step is to start
applying them. The most frequent application will be using them as
a guide for self-reflection and during career coaching one-on-ones,
but you’ll also want to create formal feedback in the form of a
performance designation.
A performance designation is an explicit statement of how an
individual is performing against the expectations of their career
ladder at their current level over a particular period of time.
Because these designations are explicit, they are a backstop
against miscommunication between the company and an
employee. However it is a cause of concern and debugging if the
explicit designation doesn’t match the implicit signals someone
has received.
Most companies start out using a single scale to represent
performance designations, often whole numbers from one to five.
Over time, these often move toward the nine-blocker format, a

three-by-three grid with one axis representing performance and
the other representing trajectory. Having used a number of
systems, I prefer to use the simplest representation possible. The
extra knobs in more complicated systems support more
granularity, but my sense is that they simply create the impression
of rigor while remaining equally challenging to implement in a
consistent, fair way.
More important than the scale used for rating is how the ratings are
calculated. The typical setup is:
1. Self-review is written by the individual receiving the
designation. The best formats try to explicitly compare and
contrast against their appropriate ladder and level. I’ve also
seen good success in the “brag document”10 format.
2. Peer reviews are written by an individual’s peers, and are
useful for recognizing mentorship and leadership
contributions that might otherwise get missed. Structured
properly, they are also useful for identifying problems that
you’re missing out on, but peers are generally not comfortable
providing negative feedback.
3. Upward reviews are used to ensure that managers’
performance includes the perspective of the individuals they
manage directly. Format is similar to peer review.
4. Manager reviews are written by an individual’s manager,
typically a synthesis of the self-peer, and upward reviews.
From these four sets of reviews, you can establish a provisional
designation, which you can then use as an input to a calibration

system. Calibrations are rounds of reviewing performance
designations and reviews, with the aim of ensuring that ratings are
consistent and fair across teams, organizations, and the company
overall.

Figure 6.9
Diagram of a three-by-three grid, with one axis representing performance and another
trajectory.

A standard calibration system will happen at each level of the
organizational tree. It’s pretty challenging to strike the balance
between avoiding calibration fatigue from many sessions and
ensuring that the people doing the calibration are familiar with the
work they are calibrating. Promotions are typically also considered
during the calibration process.

Calibrations fall soundly in the unenviable category of things that
are terrible but have no obvious replacement. Done poorly, they
become bastions of bias and fierce politicization, but they’re pretty
hard to do well even when everyone is well-meaning! Some rules
that I’ve found useful for calibrations:
1. Adopt a shared quest for consistency. Try to frame
calibration sessions as a community of coworkers working
together toward the correct designations. Steer them away
from anchoring on the designations they enter with, and
toward shared inquiry. Doing this well requires a great deal of
psychological safety among calibrators, which needs to be
cultivated long before they enter the room.11
2. Read, don’t present. Many calibration systems depend
heavily on whether managers are effective, concise
presenters, which can become a larger factor in an individual’s
designation than their own work. Don’t allow managers to
pitch their candidates in the room, but instead have everyone
read the manager review. This still depends on the manager’s
preparation, but it reduces the pressure to perform in the
calibration session itself.
3. Compare against the ladder, not against others. Comparing
folks against each other tends to introduce false equivalencies
without adding much clarity. Focus on the ladder instead.
4. Study the distribution, don’t enforce it. Historically, many
companies fit designations to a fixed curve, often referred to as
stack ranking.12 Stack ranking is a terrible solution, but here’s
the problem it tries to address: it’s easy for the meaning of a

given designation to skew as a company grows. Instead of
fitting to a distribution, I find it useful to review the
distributions across different organizations and to discuss why
they appear to be deviating. Are the organizations performing
at meaningfully different levels, or have the meanings skewed?

Figure 6.10
Diagram showing performance cycles happening in Q2 and Q4 but not Q1 or Q3.

Somewhat unexpectedly, performance designations are usually
not meant to be the primary mechanism for handling poor
performance. Instead, feedback for weak performance should be
delivered immediately. Waiting for performance designations to
deal with performance issues is typically a sign of managerial
avoidance. That said, it does serve as an effective backstop for
ensuring that these kinds of issues are being addressed.

6.5.3 Performance cycles
Once you have career ladders and performance designations
defined, you need a process to ensure that designations are being

periodically calculated in a consistent and fair fashion. That
process is your performance cycle.
Most companies do either annual or biannual performance cycles,
although it’s not unheard of to do them quarterly. The overhead of
running a cycle tends to be fairly heavy, which leads companies to
do them less frequently. Conversely, the feedback from the cycle
tends to be very important, and it serves as a primary input into
factors that individuals care about a great deal, like compensation,
so there is also countervailing pressure to do them frequently.
The most important factor I’ve seen for effective performance
cycles is forcing folks to practice. Providing well-structured
timelines is very helpful, particularly if they’re concise, but there
tend to be so many competing demands that people do the most
minimal skimming they can get away with.
Having teams do a practice round, at least for new managers or
after the cycle has been modified, is the only effective way I’ve
found to get around this. You can often direct this practice as an
opportunity for folks to get feedback on their self-reviews, ensuring
that they find it useful even if they’re initially skeptical.
Finally, there is an interesting tension between improving the cycle
as quickly as possible and allowing the cycle to stabilize so that
people can get good at it. My sense is that you want to change the
cycle at most once every second time. This lets everyone adapt
fully, and it also gives you enough time to observe how well any
changes work.
This is a small survey of some of the basics of designing
performance management systems, and there is much, much more

out there. It’s valuable to start from the common structures that
most companies adapt, but don’t fall captive to them! Many of
these systems are relatively recent inventions, and they take a
particular, peculiar view of the ideal relationship between an
employee and the company where they work.
If you’re looking for more, Laszlo Bock’s Work Rules!13 is a good
read.

6.6

Career levels, designation momentum,
level splits, etc.

The fundamentals of performance management systems can be a
bit bland! What’s really interesting are the rough edges and
unexpected emergent behaviors that come into play when you
start to design and run these performance systems with lots of real
people involved. These topics are particularly interesting to me
because they are entirely unplanned yet they crop up consistently
at pretty much every company as they scale.
Because these issues show up consistently, it’s possible to be
prepared for them, rather than being caught by surprise. Since
surprise is the cardinal sin of performance management, they often
create a bunch of trouble for managers earlier in their career, and
hopefully these notes will help you navigate these confusing
waters!

Figure 6.11
The relationship between Performance designation and quantity of designations.

Designation momentum. This is the term for the natural tendency
of a performance process to consistently produce the same
evaluations for the same people despite changes in performance. If
you are receiving good designations, this is an exciting
phenomenon, because it means you are likely to continue receiving
them. But I find that this is unexpectedly somewhat demotivating
for high performers, who want consistent, direct feedback on their
work so that they can keep improving. Those receiving poor
designations, unsurprisingly, find this phenomenon quite
frustrating, in particular because it makes it challenging for them to
determine if it’s a lagging indicator of a previous issue or if they’re
continuing to do poorly.
Many employees rely entirely on their manager to come up with a
step-by-step path to high performance. That only works when
designation momentum is taking you in a direction you’re happy
with. If it’s not, you need to be the active participant in your
success.
Propose a set of clear goals to your manager, and iterate together
toward an explicit agreement on the expectations to hit the
designation you’re aiming for. The goals need to be ambitious
enough that your manager can successfully pitch the difficulty to
their peers during calibration. If your manager is pushing back on
your goals’ ambition, that is probably their way of saying that they
think their peers will challenge their difficulty. That doesn’t mean
your plan isn’t difficult enough—it may well be very appropriate—
but it does mean you’ll have to work to help them explain why the
goals are appropriate.

Designation momentum occurs for individuals, but it also happens
for teams and organizations. For teams in this position, setting
clear goals is a good start, but it’s also necessary to align with your
peers and leadership about why your work is important. It’s your
work as a leader to explain why your work is important in terms that
the organization understands and appreciates. This is a good
example of where the failure to do so will have long-running costs.
Tit for tat. Calibration systems without strong process and fair
referees can degrade into tit-for-tat favor trading. It’s very rare to
see active collusion during calibration; rather, the most common
case occurs when folks are silent instead of raising concerns. This
silence may seem benign, but it isn’t: it pushes all responsibility for
consistent outcomes onto the individuals refereeing the calibration
process.
Encouraging engagement requires the calibration referee to model
the behavior, but more importantly, it depends on building
psychological safety and trust across the folks who are calibrating
together.
Level expansion. As a company ages, it will inevitably add levels
to support career progression. This happens even if a company
remains the same size, and it’s primarily driven by company age,
not size. This is frequently driven by a small cohort of the highestlevel executives.
If a company is experiencing particularly frequent level expansion,
it is usually a sign that progression, compensation, or recognition
has been overly tied to your level system, and you should identify
mechanisms to reduce pressure on leveling. Training and

education are useful here, as is getting more structured in
assigning important projects.
The other scenario that typically leads to level expansion is one in
which very senior executives from other, typically older, companies
are hired. These people benefited from level expansion as that
company aged, and it’s hard for them to walk away from that heady
cocktail of status, compensation, and recognition.
Level drift. Because level expansion is typically driven more by the
need for career progression than by the introduction of objectively
distinct accomplishment, levels added at the top create downward
pressure on existing levels. Expectations at a given level decrease
over time.
This inflation feels uncomfortable because we often rely on scarcity
to determine value, but it’s very uncommon for companies to
adjust compensation in response to level drift. Thus, in practice, it
is a rising tide that raises all boats. From a company perspective,
it’s important to manage level drift explicitly, so that it’s possible to
apply the shifts consistently.
Opening of the gates. The combination of level expansion and
level drift leads to periodic bursts in which a cohort of individuals
cross level boundaries together. This happens most frequently at
the second-highest level, one or two cycles after a level expansion.
As a manager, you need to coordinate with your peers to ensure
that you are opening the gate together in a consistent fashion. It’s
easy to miss these moments, but if you do you may inadvertently
eject individuals from their natural cohort of peers. You can usually
fix this in a subsequent cycle, but you’ll have missed out on

momentum. After each cycle, take an hour and try to guess when
the gates might open next, and talk with your peers about it.
Career level. For every role, a given level will be established as the
career level, and most individuals are not expected to progress
beyond that level. Over time, this often leads to career level
clustering, with the normal distribution centered on the career
level, as opposed to the typical goal of the distribution centering at
mid-level.
Time-at-level limits. Employees who haven’t yet reached career
level are expected to progress toward the career level at a
consistent pace. This is typically used as a backstop for situations
in which performance management seems appropriate but is not
occurring. My experience is that most companies have time-atlevel limits, but that there are many other ways to accomplish the
same goals; such limits are useful as part of an overall system, but
they aren’t necessary in many configurations. The only bit I’ve
found predictably important here is being consistent in how they
are applied.
Level split. Over time, it is common for the career level to
experience level drift, leading to increasingly distinct clusters of
workers who reached career level at its highest expectations and
those who have reached it recently. Given the greatly elevated
expectations beyond the career level, upward mobility remains
evasive. Many companies decide to perform a level split:
separating the career level into two halves.
This allows the distinct cohorts to inhabit distinct levels, and it
extends the runway of career progression for most employees.
Less obviously, the split tends to solidify the moat guarding access

to post-career levels. The extended moat doesn’t catch those right
on the border. It’s easy to handle these folks properly, but the moat
absolutely does slow the progression for the cohort who were
about a year away from changing levels.

Figure 6.12
Distributions of levels across different functions.

Crisis designations. These are alternatively known as retentiondriven designations. Sometimes companies find themselves in a
difficult situation, in which they have key individuals or even key
teams that they consider to be at-risk, and one of the tools for
addressing the situation is to recognize these individuals’
importance through elevated performance designations. These are
intended as temporary, but they tend to reset expectations
permanently in ways that sacrifice long-term usefulness of the
performance system in order to manage through short-term
difficulty. Sometimes stuff gets really hard, and if that’s the case,
then use the tools at your disposal, but generally try to avoid doing
this if possible.
There are, surely, hundreds more interesting topics when it comes
to how performance systems work in practice as opposed to in
design. Although these systems seem quite simple, I keep learning

something new each time I go through a performance cycle, and I
suspect that is a widely shared experience.

6.7

Creating specialized roles, like SRE or
TPMs

People are sometimes surprised to learn that I started out working
as a front-end engineer. I’d like to imagine it’s because I’m so
terribly knowledgeable about infrastructure, but I suspect that it’s
mostly grounded in my unconscionably poor design aesthetic.
Something that has stuck with me from my front-end experience
was feeling treated as a second-tier engineer: coworkers were
unwilling to do any front-end work, but were careful to categorize it
as trivial.14 The following decade has seen radical improvements in
browser compatibility and JavaScript tooling, and today’s frontend engineers occupy an esteemed position in the hive mind’s
subtle hierarchy of roles.
While nodes have swapped positions, the hierarchy of roles
remains alive and well, which is at its clearest when someone
proposes creating a job description15 or career ladder16 for a new
role. Most recently, the question of whether to create a dedicated
career ladder for site reliability engineers17 has been on my mind.
This particular question is dear to me, as I had the chance to design
the initial iteration of Uber’s SRE role, and while I think that the
design was reasonably good, there are also so many ways it could
have gone more smoothly. Faced with the decision of whether to
do it a second time, my first instinct was to freeze and think of the
ways it didn’t work.

Grappling with the problem for some time, I remained conflicted,
and decided to get more systematic around making this decision.
I’ve written up the results of my musings here. Altogether, there
are four interesting questions to dig into:
1. What are the pitfalls that these roles fall into?
2. If we do decide to create one, how do we set them up for
success?
3. What are the benefits of specialized roles?
4. Putting it all together, when should you make a new role?
At the end, creating a new role will still be a difficult decision, but
we’ll be armed with a framework to help make it.

6.7.1 Challenges
The major challenges I’ve encountered rolling out new roles are:
Class systems. Folks often look at new roles as less important,
framing them as service roles to absorb work they’re not interested
in. Sometimes roles are even explicitly designed this way, intended
to reduce work for another role as opposed to having an
empowering mission of their own.
Brittle organization. As you move away from generalized roles
and toward specialists, an unexpected consequence is that your
organization has far more single points of failure. Where everyone
on a team was once able to perform all tasks fairly effectively, now
if your project manager leaves, you’ll find that no one is able to fill

the role very capably. This brittleness is particularly acute in
organizations with frequent structural changes.18
Pattern matching. Designing a new role for your organization
tends to involve dozens of important decisions in order to align it
with your needs. Unfortunately, folks generally don’t take much
time to appreciate these distinctions, and instead pattern match on
how they’ve seen the role done elsewhere. This is a powerful force.
Some meaningfully large percentage of people will both avoid
taking any steps to learn how the role is intended to function—
reading documentation, asking about the approach—and continue
to express surprise that it doesn’t work exactly the way they saw at
a previous company.
Task offloading. When a new role is created, the role’s designers
have a very clear vision of how they want the new function to work.
Many other individuals are not particularly concerned with how the
creators want the function to work, and will view it as an
opportunity to offload tasks that they find challenging, difficult, or
uninteresting. This can lead to new roles being immediately
underwater, which often feels like success to leaders attempting to
grow the size of their organization. However, that can can easily
translate into an unlovable work experience for those performing
the role.
Roles too “trivial” to value. Many roles start by taking on work
that is viewed as uninteresting by the role shedding that
responsibility, and consequently individuals in that role tend to
view that work as trivial and unimportant. This often translates into
the new roles struggling to have their impact be recognized.

Roles too “trivial” to promote. Similar to the above, you’ll often
find that the work done by new roles is valued very highly in terms
of impact, but not viewed as sufficiently “strategic” to merit
promotion, particularly beyond career level.19 This can lead to
individuals being obligated to change roles if they want to attain
higher tiers of achievement.
Head count obstacles. Companies eventually develop arcane
rituals by which a series of emails, meetings, and incantations is
translated into an annual head count plan. These systems are,
quite reasonably, designed around supporting the needs of large,
existing roles. Consequently, they tend to make it pretty
challenging to get head count for a new role, particularly if it’s in
tension with existing functions that need to expand.
Recruiting rare humans. For entirely great reasons, people want
the first hires they make into a new role to be strong role models for
the entire function. This often leads to a proliferation of
requirements until it’s impossible for any candidate to pass the
bar.
Inability to evaluate. This is almost the opposite of the above
challenge: sometimes the existing organization has so little
experience with the new function they wish to create that they
simply don’t have a usable means by which to evaluate candidates.
This can lead to evaluations focused on qualities that are largely
independent of what the candidates would be doing if they
accepted the job.

6.7.2 Facilitating success

If we do want to create a new role, it’s important to take stock of
what we’ll need to do to make employees in the role successful.
The ingredients that I’ve found necessary for a new role to
bootstrap successfully are:
Executive sponsor. Not necessarily an executive, but you’ll need
to find an authorized, senior leader who is committed to the
success of the new function. Especially for the first performance20
and head count cycles, there will be a number of rough edges that
will require significant organizational support to navigate. The
need to find a sponsor who’ll be able to provide the necessary
support is the most obvious constraint on creating new roles. If you
can’t find a sponsor, it’s usually important feedback that
leadership doesn’t believe the new role will have a good return on
invested energy.
Recruiting partner. A new role will require significant support
from your recruiting organization in order for it to succeed. Every
role being recruited against has a high fixed cost, and adding new
roles can make it difficult for recruiters to hit the targets that their
performance is measured against. Make sure that your recruiting
team is able to support a new role! If they aren’t, the first step may
be working with your executive sponsor to direct more head count
toward recruiting.
Self-sustaining mission. New roles are frequently described in
terms of how they’ll impact other functions, rather than in terms of
what they’ll accomplish. For example, you might describe
technical program managers (TPMs) as offloading project
management responsibilities from engineering managers. This
approach frames the role as an auxiliary, support function, which

makes it difficult to recognize the work’s impact. You must be able
to frame the role’s work without referencing other existing roles in
order for it to succeed long-term.
Career ladder. In pretty much all cases, new roles should have a
career ladder from the beginning. The career ladder is the
foundation of a successful performance management system, and
it’s not possible for a role to be valued or evaluated coherently
without a thoughtful career ladder. Sometimes folks rush ahead to
hire before writing the ladder, but the work required to design an
effective interview loop is roughly equivalent to writing a career
ladder, so I’ve found that skipping this step is an act of false
economy.
Role model. Who will be the external and internal role models for
this role? A good role model is a human embodiment of the intent
codified in your career ladder. You want to have a person you can
point to.
Dedicated calibrations. Most performance management systems
rely on a calibration system to ensure that performance
designations are being assigned in a consistent fashion across
teams and roles. Sometimes managers try to perform calibration
with mixed roles in a single session, which leads to smaller roles
being treated as afterthoughts. Often the designations will be
approved without much thought, or they’ll be pushed toward the
center. Neither of those scenarios creates a useful feedback loop
for the individual in the new role. It’s best to consider them
separately in a dedicated calibration session for the one role. If
that’s not possible, the second-best option is to consider all

smaller roles together, so that various forms of specialized
contributions can be considered thoughtfully.

6.7.3 Advantages
If creating a new role was all costs and challenges, it would be easy
to decide not to move forward, but there are pretty significant
advantages to be had:
Efficiency. This is the flip side of brittle organization: people in
specialized roles are able to spend more time doing a smaller set of
tasks, which leads to great expertise in that area. For areas where
existing roles are spending significant amounts of time, this
specialized efficiency can translate into significantly more overall
throughput without increasing head count. I think this is the most
important advantage, and it’s especially valuable for teams or
companies in which financial resources are the limit on growth
(which is most teams at most companies).
Efficiently solve constraints. This is an extension of the
efficiency point, but subtly different: with specialists, you can add
exactly the kind of capacity you are missing, which is very powerful
for efficiently solving constraints. If your organization is low on
project management bandwidth, you could add five new managers
who can each take on a bit of it, or you might be able to add a single
project manager who individually adds as much relevant
bandwidth as the five managers combined.
Recognition. Simply creating a new role will absolutely not cause
folks to suddenly start valuing work that they previously dismissed,
but it can be a useful component in that shift. In particular, it will

provide additional structural mechanisms to support recognition,
such as distinct career ladders, calibration sessions, and even
compensation structures.
Evaluating for strengths. It’s often challenging to interview
specialists effectively, because you’ll typically evaluate them
based on how they’d perform for your generalist position, while
missing out on their peculiar areas of excellence. Creating a new
role makes it possible to target the interview process on the areas
that are most important.
Increased hiring pool. You’re now able to consider a new pool of
candidates in your hiring funnel,21 and that potentially expands the
total number of candidates you can consider.
Specialized compensation. In some cases, the market
compensation for specialists is significantly higher than that for
generalists, and in that case it’s often quite a challenge to hire
specialists without specialized compensation bands.

6.7.4 What to do?
Once you’re familiar with the challenges and the costs of
provisioning a new role, all that’s left is to consider the advantages
and make a quick judgment call. Ah, well, actually it’s still a pretty
hard decision to make!
Some questions that can guide this decision are:
Is there a less extreme way to address the recognition gap?
Maybe you could adjust the existing career ladder instead.

Do you have a plan for changing how the company values the
work? Creating a new role won’t inherently change how the
company values this work. You’ll still need to do the hard work
of expanding your company’s values.
If you have a plan to change company values, could you do a
trial run of that plan before introducing the new role? This
helps de-risk the experiment for the folks you are trying to
help, and it’s much easier to boot.
Does the function already exist in secret? Sometimes you’ll
find that roles have already split, and you’re less making a new
function than recognizing an existing one.
Will this increase short-term recognition of performance but
ultimately hurt the career growth of employees who change
roles? Creating a new role is absolutely the kind of thing that
can initially feel like progress but ultimately sets folks back
significantly, requiring them to transition to other roles later.
Is the number of people impacted sufficiently high and is the
recognition gap of value significantly large, to cover the sizable
costs of creating and nurturing a new role?
Who will pay the maintenance costs for the new role? If the
answer is that you’ll personally pay them, who will take up the
torch if you leave?
As you think through those questions, hopefully the right approach
for your situation gets a bit clearer. As a rule of thumb, I would
always create a new role if it immediately covered 20 individuals;
would reluctantly create a new role if it would cover 20 individuals

within two years; and would be skeptical of creating a new role that
couldn’t meet one of those two conditions!

6.8

Designing an interview loop

Anyone who has flipped through Cracking the Coding Interview by
Gayle Laakmann McDowell22 knows that evaluating candidates for
a new role is a coarse science. Most interviewers are skeptical of
the accuracy of their interviews, and it’s hardly the rare interview
retrospective where interviewers aren’t sure they got enough
signal on a candidate to hire with confidence.
Although a dose of caution about interview accuracy is wellfounded, I’m increasingly convinced that a bit of structure and
creativity leads to interview loops that give a clear signal on
whether a candidate will succeed in the role, and whether they can
do so in a fair and consistent fashion.
The approach I’ve started using to design interview loops is:
Metrics first. Do not start designing a new interview loop until
you’ve instrumented your hiring funnel.23 It’s pretty hard to
evaluate your loop or improve it without this data, so don’t
undertake an improvement project without it.
Understand the current loop’s performance. Take time to
identify what you think does and doesn’t work well in your current
process. Three sources that are useful are:
Funnel performance. Where do people drop off in your funnel?
How does your funnel benchmark against your peers at similar
companies?

Employee trajectory. For all the candidates you have hired,
understand how their work performance relates to their
interview performance. What elements correlate heavily with
success, and which appear to filter on things that end up not
contributing to performance in the job?
Candidate debriefs. Try to schedule calls with everyone who
goes through your process, especially with those who drop
out.
Learn from peers. Chat with folks who have interviewed at other
companies for the kind of role you’re hoping to evaluate. You’re not
looking to copy elements verbatim, but rather to get a survey of
existing ideas.
Find role models. Write up a list of ideal candidates for the role
and write down what makes them ideal. Be deliberate about
ensuring that your list of role models includes women and
underrepresented minorities, helping avoid matching on
correlating traits in a less diverse set of role models.
Identify skills. From your role models and your career ladder,24
identify a list of skills that are essential to the candidate’s success
in the role they’ll be interviewing for. Take a bit of time to rank
those skills from most to least important.
Test for each skill. For each skill, design a test to evaluate the
candidates’ strengths. Whenever possible, prefer tests that have a
candidate show their strengths, avoiding formats in which they tell
you about it. For example, we took an interview in which folks
described their experience building a healthy team, and replaced it
with an interview in which folks are given results from an

organization health survey and asked to identify issues and
propose how they’d address them.
Avoid testing for polish. Many interviews accidentally test for
the candidate’s polish as opposed to testing for any particular
skill. This is especially true for experiential interviews in which
folks are asked to describe their work, and less common in
interviews that ask them to demonstrate skills. That isn’t to
say that you shouldn’t deliberately test for polish—it’s quite
useful—just that you shouldn’t do it inadvertently.
For each test, a rubric. Once you’ve identified your tests, write a
rubric to assess performance on each test. Good rubrics include
explicit scores and criteria for reaching each score. If you find it
difficult to identify a useful rubric for a test, then you should look for
a different test that is easier to assess.
Avoid Boolean rubrics. Some tests tend to return Boolean
results: for example, whether someone has experience
managing someone is a good example of a common Boolean
filter. These are inefficient tests because you pretty quickly get
a sense of whether someone has or hasn’t ticked this box, and
the rest of the interview doesn’t lend more signal. Likewise,
you can almost always answer Boolean questions from an
applicant’s resume or in a pre-interview screen.
Group tests into interviews. Once you’ve identified the tests,
group them into sets that can be performed together in a single 45minute interview, or whatever duration you prefer. The more
cohesive the format and subjects of the tests in a given interview,
the more natural it’ll feel for the candidate.

Run the loop. At this point you have an entire loop ready, and it’s
time to start using it. Especially early on, you should be asking
candidates what did or didn’t work well—but, really, you should
never stop doing this! Each debrief will uncover some
opportunities to improve your rubric or tests.
Review the hiring funnel. After you’ve run the new loop 10 to 20
times, review the funnel metrics to see how it’s working out. Are
some of the interviews yielding too many passes? Are others too
hard? Review the results in batch.
Schedule an annual refresh. As the initial rate of iteration slows
down, schedule a review for a year out, and at that point you get to
ask yourself if the loop has proven effective for your needs, or if you
should restart this process!
At this point, you have a complete interview loop and the systems
to guide the loop toward improvement. Beyond this approach, here
are a few more general pieces of guidance:
Try to avoid design by committee. These almost always lead to
incremental change. Prefer a working group of one or two people
that is then tested against a bunch of candidates for feedback!
Don’t hire for potential. Hiring for potential is a major vector for
bias, and you should try to avoid it. If you do decide to include
potential, then spend time developing an objective rubric for
potential, and ensure that the signals it indexes on are consistently
discoverable.
Use your career ladder. Writing a great interview loop is almost
identical to writing a great career ladder.25 If you’ve already written

expectations for the role, reuse those as much as possible.
Iterate on the interview a little. When you first create an
interview, you should spend time iterating on the interview format,
but the rate of change should drop to near-zero after you’ve given
it approximately 10 times.
Iterate on the rubric a lot. As you attempt to apply the interview
rubrics, you’ll continue to find edge cases and ambiguities.
Continuing to incorporate those into the interview rubrics is an
essential way to reduce bias creeping in.
A/B testing loops. There is a platonic ideal of testing new
interviews using the standard mechanisms we use to test other
changes, such as A/B testing. At a certain scale, I think that is
almost certainly the best approach, but so far I’ve been part of a
company with enough volume to usefully conduct such tests. In
particular, these tests are quite expensive, because you need to
control for interviewers and have those interviewers trained on
both sets of interviews, which ends up taking a long time to reach
confidence that a new loop is better.
Hiring committees. As an alternative to A/B testing, I have found
a centralized hiring committee that reviews every candidate’s
interview experience to be quite valuable for identifying trends
across new loops. More generally, this approach helps guide the
overall process toward consistency and fairness.
Wrapping all my learnings on designing interview loops together
into something pithy: avoid reusing stuff that you know doesn’t
work, and instead approach the matter from first principles with

creativity. Then keep iterating based on how it works for
candidates!

Figure 6.13
Steps of designing an interview loop.

7

CHAPTER 7

Appendix

Figure 7.1
Organization processes added to support operating it as it scales.

7.1

Tools for operating a growing
organization

One tension in management is staying far enough out of the details
to let folks innovate, yet staying near enough to keep the work
well-aligned with your company’s value structures. Seeing this
challenge from a variety of perspectives with different teams, I’ve
collected a playbook of tools to facilitate the balancing act, and a
loose framework for rolling those tools out.
A few caveats about process rollouts:
1. Teams and organizations have a very limited appetite for new
process; try to roll out one change at a time, and don’t roll out
the next change until the previous change has enthusiastic
compliance.
2. Process needs to be adapted to its environment, and success
comes from blending it with your particular context.

7.1.1 Line management
Around the time your team reaches three engineers, you’ll want to
be running a sprint process. There are many successful ways to
run sprints. Try a few and see what resonates for you.
The criteria I use to evaluate if a team’s sprint works well:
1. Team knows what they should be working on.

2. Team knows why their work is valuable.
3. Team can determine if their work is complete.
4. Team knows how to figure out what to work on next.
5. Stakeholders can learn what the team is working on.
6. Stakeholders can learn what the team plans to work on next.
7. Stakeholders know how to influence the team’s plans.
One of my coworkers, Davin Bogan,1 likes to say that “shipping is a
habit,” and a well-run sprint both helps teams establish that habit
and serves as a mechanism that creates visibility within a team that
hasn’t quite gotten there yet. As a team’s direct manager, you can
use this to ground concerns around individuals who might not be
ramping up successfully, and, as you move into middle
management, sprints are useful for debugging within your
organization.

Figure 7.2
Org chart for a line manager.

Within your sprint process, your backlog is particularly important:
it’s the context-rich interface that you’ll use to negotiate changes
in direction and priority with your stakeholders. It’s always more
interesting to discuss which of two things we should do next, rather
than whether something is worth doing.
As your team gets larger and the number of stakeholders you’re
working with grows, you’ll also want to develop a roadmap
describing your high-level plans over the next three to twelve
months. Planning does not inherently create value, so aim to keep
your roadmap as short as possible and allow teams to coordinate.
Initially, the distinction between your backlog and your roadmap
may be quite small: your backlog a bit more detailed, your roadmap
looking a bit further into the future. The value in having both is that
this lets you specialize the backlog to be more useful for your team

and design the roadmap to be more useful for your stakeholders,
rather than relying on one tool to satisfy both sets of constraints.
At this point, most teams will be tracking operational metrics,
with a focus on tracking day-to-day user and system behavior.
These metrics tend to be exclusively focused on helping the team
operate, and in particular detect outages, regressions, and other
interruptions.

7.1.2 Middle management
As you move into middle management, you’ll become responsible
for two to five line managers. As a result, you’ll need to shift away
from day-to-day execution to give your line managers room to
make an impact (and in order to free yourself up to make a larger
impact as well).
You’ll be spending more time on your roadmaps as:
Your move from receiving asks from stakeholders to deeply
understanding what is motivating those asks.
You invest in learning what other folks are working on in order
to continuously validate that your teams’ efforts are valuable.

Figure 7.3
Org chart for a middle manager.

As you spend less time with your teams, you’ll want to start a
weekly staff meeting with your managers. The best versions I’ve
seen start with brief updates from each attendee, at most a couple
of minutes per person, and then move into group discussions on
shared topics. Topics might include running effective sprints,
planning, career development, or whatever else proves useful.
Done well, these discussions are the key learning forum for you and
the managers you work with.
As your teams and the organization around you grow, you’ll start to
see more and more cases of preventable misalignment: two teams
working on similar projects because they’re unaware of each other,
another team struggling because they don’t have a reliable email
service when your team actually does have one. At that point, it’s
time for each team to write a vision document: a concise
statement of the team’s goals and the strategy for accomplishing
those goals.

It’ll be extremely frustrating for some teams to write their vision
documents, because it’ll force them to recognize and reconcile
areas of distributed and unclear ownership. It’s worth the pain!
Once your vision comes together, it becomes your roadmap’s
North Star, and it will help you reconcile stakeholder asks with your
longer-term product and technology strategies.
This is also when you’ll want to start skip-level one-on-ones to
ensure that there are direct, open channels for feedback about your
managers and your teams. Typically, if you’re learning something
negative during a skip-level, you should have learned it somewhere
else first, but rigorous processes have some redundancy. Nothing
works consistently every time.

7.1.3 Managing an organization
As your organization starts to get even larger and you’re mostly
managing middle managers, the playbook shifts again. Your staff
meeting has changed in one of two ways:
The meeting has so many managers in it that they can’t even
provide important updates. Plus the discussions have become
unwieldly, with a couple of folks dominating conversations.
Alternatively, your meeting now includes your middle
managers, who themselves are likely missing some of the
context about what their teams are working on or struggling
with.
The mechanism I’ve found most helpful in this case is to ensure
that every team has a clear set of directional metrics in an easily

discoverable dashboard. The metrics should cover both the
longer-term goals of the team (user adoption, revenue, return
users, etc.) and the operational baselines necessary to know if the
team is functioning well (on-call load, incidents, availability, cost,
and so on.) For each metric, the dashboard should make three
things clear: the current value, the goal value, and the trend
between them.

Figure 7.4
Org chart for a director.

Now your staff meetings can start with a quick metrics review to
give a sense of whether there is somewhere you need to drill in,
and, rather than peanut buttering, you can focus your attention on
projects that are exceeding or struggling.
The other mechanism I’ve found to be exceptionally useful at this
point is team snippets. These come out every two to four weeks
and give snapshots of each team’s sprints: what they’re doing, why
they’re doing it, and what they’re planning to do next. These are

valuable for you to retain a sense of what your teams are working
on, but they are invaluable for decentralizing coordination and
communication between teams in your organization, as you
become increasingly ineffective in that role.
Along the way, remember that your old problems still exist, it’s just
that other folks are dealing with them instead. As you roll out new
processes to solve your personal pain points, you should be
handing off processes to your managers, and keeping those
practices intact and running. This will leave you with a tapestry of
reinforcing processes, which support you and each layer of
management that you support.

7.2

Books I’ve found very useful

Folks occasionally ask me to recommend books to help them in
their professional career. I can usually think of a couple
recommendations in the moment, but I always feel as if I’m
forgetting far more good books than I’m recommending. In the
hope of providing a better answer going forward, I’ve written up
some of the general purpose, leadership, and management books
I’ve read.
Not all of these are classically great books—some are even a bit
dull to read—but they’ve changed how I think in a meaningful way.
They’re roughly sorted in order from those I found most valuable to
least:
1. Thinking in Systems: A Primer
by Donella H. Meadows
For me, systems thinking has been the most effective
universal tool for reasoning through complex problems, and
this book is a readable, powerful introduction.
2. Don’t Think of an Elephant! Know Your Values and Frame
the Debate
by George Lakoff
While written from a political perspective that some might find
challenging, this book completely changed how I think about
presenting ideas. You may be tempted to instead read Lakoff’s

more academic writing, but I’d recommend reading this first as
it’s much briefer and more readable.
3. Peopleware: Productive Projects and Teams
by Timothy Lister and Tom DeMarco
The book that has given generations of developers permission
to speak on the challenges of space planning and open offices.
Particularly powerful in grounding the discussion in data.
4. Slack: Getting Past Burnout, Busywork, and the Myth of
Total Efficiency
by Tom DeMarco
Documents a compelling case for middle managers as the
critical layer where organizational memory rests and learning
occurs. A meditation on the gap between efficiency and
effectiveness.
5. The Mythical Man-Month
by Frederick Brooks
The first professional book I ever read, this one opened my
eyes to the wealth of software engineering literature waiting
out there.
6. Good Strategy/Bad Strategy
The Difference and Why it Matters
by Richard Rumelt
This book gave me permission to acknowledge that many
strategies I’ve seen professionally are not very good. Rumelt
also offers a structured approach to writing good strategies.

7. The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement
by Eliyahu M. Goldratt
Explores how constraint theory can be used to optimize
process.
8. The Five Dysfunctions of a Team
by Patrick Lencioni
9. The Three Signs of a Miserable Job
by Patrick Lencioni
Another Lencioni book, this one explaining a three-point
model for what makes jobs rewarding.
10. Finite and Infinite Games
by James P. Carse
Success in most life situations is about letting everyone
continue to play, not about zero-sum outcomes. This seems
pretty obvious, but for me it helped reset my sense of why I
work.
11. INSPIRED: How to Create Tech Products Customers Love
by Marty Cagan
A thoughtful approach to product management.
12. The Innovator’s Dilemma: When New Technologies Cause
Great Firms to Fail
by Clayton M. Christensen

A look at how being hyper-rational in the short run has led
many great companies to failure. These days, I think about this
constantly when doing strategic planning.
13. The E-Myth Revisited: Why Most Small Businesses Don’t
Work and What to Do About It
by Michael E. Gerber
The idea that leadership is usually working “on” the business,
not “in” the business. Work in the business to learn how it
works, but then document the system and hand it off.
14. Fierce Conversations: Achieving Success at Work and in
Life, One Conversation at a Time
by Susan Scott
How to say what you need to say. This is particularly powerful
in giving structure to get past conflict aversion.
15. Becoming a Technical Leader: An Organic Problem-Solving
Approach
by Gerald M. Weinberg
Permission to be a leader that builds on your strengths, not
whatever model that folks think you should fit into.
16. Designing with the Mind in Mind
by Jeff Johnson
An introduction to usability and design, grounding both in how
the brain works.

17. The Leadership Pipeline: How to Build the Leadership
Powered Company
by Ram Charan, Steve Drotter, and Jim Noel
This book opened my eyes to just how thoughtful many
companies are in intentionally growing new leadership.
18. The Manager’s Path: A Guide for Tech Leaders Navigating
Growth and Change
by Camille Fournier
19. High Output Management
by Andy S. Grove
20. The First 90 Days: Proven Strategies for Getting Up to
Speed Faster and Smarter, Updated and Expanded
by Michael D. Watkins
21. The Effective Executive: The Definitive Guide to Getting the
Right Things Done
by Peter F. Drucker
22. Don’t Make Me Think: A Common Sense Approach to Web
Usability
by Steve Krug
23. The Deadline: A Novel About Project Management
by Tom DeMarco
24. The Psychology of Computer Programming
by Gerald M. Weinberg

25. Adrenaline Junkies and Template Zombies: Understanding
Patterns of Project Behavior
by Tom Demarco, Peter Hruschka, Tim Lister, Steve
McMenamin, Suzanne Robertson, and James Robertson
26. The Secrets of Consulting: A Guide to Giving and Getting
Advice Successfully
by Gerald M. Weinberg
27. Death by Meeting
by Patrick Lencioni
28. The Advantage: Why Organizational Health Trumps
Everything Else in Business
by Patrick Lencioni
29. Rise: 3 Practical Steps for Advancing Your Career, Standing
Out as a Leader, and Liking Your Life
by Patty Azzarello
30. The Innovator’s Solution: Creating and Sustaining
Successful Growth
by Clayton M. Christensen and Michael E. Raynor
31. The Phoenix Project: A Novel about IT, DevOps, and Helping
Your Business Win
by Gene Kim, Kevin Behr, and George Spafford
32. Accelerate: The Science of Lean Software and DevOps:
Building and Scaling High Performing Technology
Organizations
by Nicole Forsgren PhD, Jez Humble, and Gene Kim

7.3

Papers I’ve found very useful

I’ve long been a fan of hosting paper reading groups,2 where a
group of folks sit down and talk about interesting technical papers.
One of the first steps to do that is identifying some papers worth
chatting about, and here is a list of some papers I’ve seen lead to
excellent discussions!
1. “Dynamo: Amazon’s Highly Available Key-Value Store”
If you read only the abstract, you’d be forgiven for not being
overly excited about the Dynamo paper. This paper presents
the design and implementation of Dynamo, a highly available
key-value storage system that some of Amazon’s core
services use to provide an always-on experience. To achieve
this level of availability, Dynamo sacrifices consistency under
certain failure scenarios. It makes extensive use of object
versioning and application-assisted conflict resolution in a
manner that provides a novel interface for developers to use.
That said, this is in some senses “the” classic modern systems
paper. It has happened more than once that an engineer I’ve
met has only read a single systems paper in their career, and
that paper was the Dynamo paper. This paper is a phenomenal
introduction to eventual consistency, coordinating state
across distributed storage, reconciling data as it diverges
across replicas, and much more.
2. “Hints for Computer System Design”
3

Butler Lampson3 is winner of the ACM Turing Award (among
other awards), and worked at the Xerox PARC. This paper
concisely summarizes many of his ideas around systems
design, and is a great read.
In his words:
Studying the design and implementation of a number of computers has led
to some general hints for system design. They are described here and
illustrated by many examples, ranging from hardware such as the Alto and
the Dorado to application programs such as Bravo and Star.

This paper itself acknowledges that it doesn’t aim to break any
new ground, but it’s a phenomenal overview.
3. “Big Ball of Mud”
A reaction against exuberant publications about grandiose
design patterns, this paper labels the most frequent
architectural pattern as the Big Ball of Mud, and explores why
elegant initial designs rarely remain intact as a system goes
from concept to solution.
From the abstract:
While much attention has been focused on high-level software
architectural patterns, what is, in effect, the de-facto standard software
architecture is seldom discussed. This paper examines this most
frequently deployed of software architectures: the BIG BALL OF MUD. A
BIG BALL OF MUD is a casually, even haphazardly, structured system. Its
organization, if one can call it that, is dictated more by expediency than
design. Yet, its enduring popularity cannot merely be indicative of a
general disregard for architecture.

Although humor certainly infuses this paper, it’s also correct
that software design is remarkably poor. Very few systems

have a design phase and few of those resemble the initial
design (and documentation is rarely updated to reflect later
decisions), making this an important topic for consideration.
4. “The Google File System”
From the abstract:
The file system has successfully met our storage needs. It is widely
deployed within Google as the storage platform for the generation and
processing of data used by our service as well as research and
development efforts that require large data sets. The largest cluster to date
provides hundreds of terabytes of storage across thousands of disks on
over a thousand machines, and it is concurrently accessed by hundreds of
clients.
In this paper, we present file system interface extensions designed to
support distributed applications, discuss many aspects of our design, and
report measurements from both micro-benchmarks and real-world use.
Google has done something fairly remarkable in defining the technical
themes in Silicon Valley and, at least debatably, across the entire
technology industry. The company has been doing so for more than the
last decade, and was only recently joined, to a lesser extent, by Facebook
and Twitter as they reached significant scale. Google has defined these
themes largely through noteworthy technical papers. The Google File
System (GFS) paper is one of the early entries in that strategy, and is also
remarkable as the paper that largely inspired the Hadoop File System
(HFS).

5. “On Designing and Deploying Internet-Scale Services”
We don’t always remember to consider Microsoft as one of the
largest internet technology players—although, increasingly,
Azure is making that comparison obvious and immediate—and
it certainly wasn’t a name that necessarily came to mind in
2007. This excellent paper from James Hamilton, which
explores tips on building operable systems at extremely large

scale, makes it clear that not considering Microsoft as a large
internet player was a lapse in our collective judgment.
From the abstract:
The system-to-administrator ratio is commonly used as a rough metric to
understand administrative costs in high-scale services. With smaller, less
automated services this ratio can be as low as 2:1, whereas on industry
leading, highly automated services, we’ve seen ratios as high as 2,500:1.
Within Microsoft services, Autopilot [1] is often cited as the magic behind
the success of the Windows Live Search team in achieving high system-toadministrator ratios. While auto-administration is important, the most
important factor is actually the service itself. Is the service efficient to
automate? Is it what we refer to more generally as operations-friendly?
Services that are operations-friendly require little human intervention, and
both detect and recover from all but the most obscure failures without
administrative intervention. This paper summarizes the best practices
accumulated over many years in scaling some of the largest services at
MSN and Windows Live.

This is a true checklist of how to design and evaluate largescale systems (almost in the way that The Twelve-Factor App4
wants to serve as a checklist for operable applications).
6. “CAP Twelve Years Later: How the ‘Rules’ Have Changed”
Eric Brewer posited the CAP theorem5 in the early aughts, and
12 years later he wrote this excellent overview and review of
CAP (which argues that distributed systems have to pick
between either availability or consistency during partitions),
Here’s the rationale for the paper, in Brewer’s words:
In the decade since its introduction, designers and researchers have used
(and sometimes abused) the CAP theorem as a reason to explore a wide
variety of novel distributed systems. The NoSQL movement also has
applied it as an argument against traditional databases.

CAP is interesting because there is not a “seminal CAP paper,”
but this article serves well in such a paper’s stead. These ideas
are expanded on in the “Harvest and Yield” paper.6
7. “Harvest, Yield, and Scalable Tolerant Systems”
This paper builds on the concepts from CAP Twelve Years
Later, introducing the concepts of harvest and yield to add
more nuance to the discussion about AP versus CP.
The cost of reconciling consistency and state management with high
availability is highly magnified by the unprecedented scale and robustness
requirements of today’s internet applications. We propose two strategies
for improving overall availability using simple mechanisms that scale over
large applications whose output behavior tolerates graceful degradation.
We characterize this degradation in terms of harvest and yield, and map it
directly onto engineering mechanisms that enhance availability by
improving fault isolation, and in some cases also simplify programming. By
collecting examples of related techniques in the literature and illustrating
the surprising range of applications that can benefit from these
approaches, we hope to motivate a broader research program in this area.

The harvest and yield concepts are particularly interesting
because they are both self-evident and very rarely explicitly
used; instead, distributed systems continue to fail in mostly
undefined ways. Hopefully, as we keep rereading this paper,
we’ll also start to incorporate its design concepts into the
systems we subsequently build!
8. “MapReduce: Simplified Data Processing on Large
Clusters”
The MapReduce paper is an excellent example of an idea that
has been so successful that it now seems self-evident. The
idea of applying the concepts of functional programming at

scale became a clarion call, provoking a shift from data
warehousing to a new paradigm for data analysis:
MapReduce is a programming model and an associated implementation for
processing and generating large data sets. Users specify a map function
that processes a key/value pair to generate a set of intermediate key/value
pairs, and a reduce function that merges all intermediate values associated
with the same intermediate key. Many real-world tasks are expressible in
this model, as shown in the paper.

Much like the Google File System paper was an inspiration for
the Hadoop File System, this paper was itself a major
inspiration for Hadoop.
9. “Dapper, a Large-Scale Distributed Systems Tracing
Infrastructure”
The Dapper paper introduces a performant approach to
tracing requests across many services, which has become
increasingly relevant as more companies refactor core
monolithic applications into dozens or hundreds of microservices.
From the abstract:
Here we introduce the design of Dapper, Google’s production distributed
systems tracing infrastructure, and describe how our design goals of low
overhead, application-level transparency, and ubiquitous deployment on a
very large-scale system were met. Dapper shares conceptual similarities
with other tracing systems, particularly Magpie and X-Trace, but certain
design choices were made that have been key to its success in our
environment, such as the use of sampling and restricting the
instrumentation to a rather small number of common libraries.

The ideas from Dapper have since made their way into open
source, especially in Zipkin7 and OpenTracing.8

10. “Kafka: a Distributed Messaging System for Log
Processing”
Apache Kafka9 has become a core piece of infrastructure for
many internet companies. Its versatility lends it to many roles,
serving as the ingress point to “data land” for some and as a
durable queue for others. And that’s just scratching the
surface.
Kafka is not only a useful addition to your tool kit, it’s also a
beautifully designed system:
Log processing has become a critical component of the data pipeline for
consumer internet companies. We introduce Kafka, a distributed
messaging system that we developed for collecting and delivering high
volumes of log data with low latency. Our system incorporates ideas from
existing log aggregators and messaging systems, and is suitable for both
offline and online message consumption. We made quite a few
unconventional yet practical design choices in Kafka to make our system
efficient and scalable. Our experimental results show that Kafka has
superior performance when compared to two popular messaging systems.
We have been using Kafka in production for some time and it is processing
hundreds of gigabytes of new data each day.

In particular, Kafka’s partitions do a phenomenal job of forcing
application designers to make explicit decisions about trading
off performance for predictable message ordering.
11. “Wormhole: Reliable Pub-Sub to Support Geo-Replicated
Internet Services”
In many ways similar to Kafka, Facebook’s Wormhole is
another highly scalable approach to messaging:
Wormhole is a publish-subscribe (pub-sub) system developed for use
within Facebook’s geographically replicated datacenters. It is used to

reliably replicate changes among several Facebook services including
TAO, Graph Search, and Memcache. This paper describes the design and
implementation of Wormhole as well as the operational challenges of
scaling the system to support the multiple data storage systems deployed
at Facebook. Our production deployment of Wormhole transfers over 35
GBytes/sec in steady state (50 millions messages/sec or 5 trillion
messages/day) across all deployments with bursts up to 200 GBytes/sec
during failure recovery. We demonstrate that Wormhole publishes updates
with low latency to subscribers that can fail or consume updates at varying
rates, without compromising efficiency.

In particular, note the approach to supporting lagging
consumers without sacrificing overall system throughput.
12. “Borg, Omega, and Kubernetes”
While the individual papers for each of Google’s orchestration
systems (Borg, Omega, and Kubernetes) are worth reading in
their own right, this article is an excellent overview of the
three:
Though widespread interest in software containers is a relatively recent
phenomenon, at Google we have been managing Linux containers at scale
for more than ten years and built three different container-management
systems in that time. Each system was heavily influenced by its
predecessors, even though they were developed for different reasons. This
article describes the lessons we’ve learned from developing and operating
them.

Fortunately, not all orchestration happens under Google’s
aegis, and Apache Mesos’s alternative two-layer scheduling
architecture is a fascinating read as well.
13. “Large-Scale Cluster Management at Google with Borg”
Borg has orchestrated much of Google’s infrastructure for
quite some time (significantly predating Omega, although,

fascinatingly, the Omega paper predates the Borg paper by
two years):
Google’s Borg system is a cluster manager that runs hundreds of
thousands of jobs, from many thousands of different applications, across a
number of clusters each with up to tens of thousands of machines.

This paper takes a look at Borg’s centralized scheduling
model, which was both effective and efficient, although it
became increasingly challenging to modify and scale over
time. Borg inspired both Omega and Kubernetes within Google
(the former to optimistically replace it, and the latter to
seemingly commercialize the designers’ learnings, or at least
to prevent Mesos from capturing too much mind share).
14. “Omega: Flexible, Scalable Schedulers for Large Compute
Clusters”
Omega is, among many other things, an excellent example of
the second-system effect,10 in which an attempt to replace a
complex existing system with something far more elegant
ends up being more challenging than anticipated.
In particular, Omega is a reaction against the realities of
extending the aging Borg system:
Increasing scale and the need for rapid response to changing requirements
are hard to meet with current monolithic cluster scheduler architectures.
This restricts the rate at which new features can be deployed, decreases
efficiency and utilization, and will eventually limit cluster growth. We
present a novel approach to address these needs using parallelism, shared
state, and lock-free optimistic concurrency control.

11

Perhaps it’s also an example of “worse is better”11 once again
taking the day.
15. “Mesos: A Platform for Fine-Grained Resource Sharing in
the Data Center”
This paper describes the design of Apache Mesos,12 in
particular its distinctive two-level scheduler:
We present Mesos, a platform for sharing commodity clusters between
multiple diverse cluster computing frameworks, such as Hadoop and MPI.
Sharing improves cluster utilization and avoids per-framework data
replication. Mesos shares resources in a fine-grained manner, allowing
frameworks to achieve data locality by taking turns reading data stored on
each machine. To support the sophisticated schedulers of today’s
frameworks, Mesos introduces a distributed two-level scheduling
mechanism called resource offers. Mesos decides how many resources to
offer each framework, while frameworks decide which resources to accept
and which computations to run on them.
Our results show that Mesos can achieve near-optimal data locality when
sharing the cluster among diverse frameworks, can scale to 50,000
(emulated) nodes, and is resilient to failures.

Used heavily by Twitter and Apple, Mesos was for some time
the only open-source general scheduler with significant
adoption. It’s now in a fascinating competition for mind share
with Kubernetes.
16. “Design Patterns for Container-Based Distributed Systems”
The move to container-based deployment and orchestration
has introduced a whole new set of vocabulary, including
“sidecars” and “adapters.” This paper provides a survey of the
patterns that have evolved over the past decade, as

microservices and containers have become increasingly
prominent infrastructure components:
In the late 1980s and early 1990s, object-oriented programming
revolutionized software development, popularizing the approach of
building of applications as collections of modular components. Today we
are seeing a similar revolution in distributed system development, with the
increasing popularity of microservice architectures built from
containerized software components. Containers are particularly wellsuited as the fundamental “object” in distributed systems by virtue of the
walls they erect at the container boundary. As this architectural style
matures, we are seeing the emergence of design patterns, much as we did
for object-oriented programs, and for the same reason—thinking in terms
of objects (or containers) abstracts away the low-level details of code,
eventually revealing higher-level patterns that are common to a variety of
applications and algorithms.

The term “sidecar” in particular, likely originated in this blog
post from Netflix,13 which is a worthy read in its own right.
17. “Raft: In Search of an Understandable Consensus
Algorithm”
We often see the second-system effect when a second system
becomes bloated and complex relative to a simple initial
system. However, the roles are reversed in the case of Paxos
and Raft. Whereas Paxos is often considered beyond human
comprehension, Raft is a fairly easy read:
Raft is a consensus algorithm for managing a replicated log. It produces a
result equivalent to (multi-)Paxos, and it is as efficient as Paxos, but its
structure is different from Paxos; this makes Raft more understandable
than Paxos and also provides a better foundation for building practical
systems. In order to enhance understandability, Raft separates the key
elements of consensus, such as leader election, log replication, and safety,
and it enforces a stronger degree of coherency to reduce the number of
states that must be considered. Results from a user study demonstrate

that Raft is easier for students to learn than Paxos. Raft also includes a new
mechanism for changing the cluster membership, which uses overlapping
majorities to guarantee safety.

Raft is used by etcd14 and influxDB15 among many others.
18. “Paxos Made Simple”
One of Leslie Lamport’s numerous influential papers, “Paxos
Made Simple” is a gem, both in explaining the notoriously
complex Paxos algorithm and because, even at its simplest,
Paxos isn’t really that simple:
The Paxos algorithm for implementing a fault-tolerant distributed system
has been regarded as difficult to understand, perhaps because the original
presentation was Greek to many readers. In fact, it is among the simplest
and most obvious of distributed algorithms. At its heart is a consensus
algorithm—the “synod” algorithm. The next section shows that this
consensus algorithm follows almost unavoidably from the properties we
want it to satisfy. The last section explains the complete Paxos algorithm,
which is obtained by the straightforward application of consensus to the
state machine approach for building a distributed system—an approach
that should be well-known, since it is the subject of what is probably the
most often-cited article on the theory of distributed systems.

Paxos itself remains a deeply innovative concept, and is the
algorithm behind Google’s Chubby and Apache Zookeeper,16
among many others.
19. “SWIM: Scalable Weakly-Consistent Infection-Style Process
Group Membership Protocol”
The majority of consensus algorithms focus on being
consistent during partition, but SWIM goes the other direction
and focuses on availability:

Several distributed peer-to-peer applications require weakly-consistent
knowledge of process group membership information at all participating
processes. SWIM is a generic software module that offers this service for
large-scale process groups. The SWIM effort is motivated by the
unscalability of traditional heart-beating protocols, which either impose
network loads that grow quadratically with group size, or compromise
response times or false positive frequency w.r.t. detecting process
crashes. This paper reports on the design, implementation, and
performance of the SWIM sub-system on a large cluster of commodity PCs.

SWIM is used in HashiCorp’s software, as well as Uber’s
Ringpop.
20. “The Byzantine Generals Problem”
Another classic Leslie Lamport paper on consensus, the
Byzantine Generals Problem explores how to deal with
distributed actors that intentionally or accidentally submit
incorrect messages:
Reliable computer systems must handle malfunctioning components that
give conflicting information to different parts of the system. This situation
can be expressed abstractly in terms of a group of generals of the
Byzantine army camped with their troops around an enemy city.
Communicating only by messenger, the generals must agree upon a
common battle plan. However, one or more of them may be traitors who
will try to confuse the others. The problem is to find an algorithm to ensure
that the loyal generals will reach agreement. It is shown that, using only
oral messages, this problem is solvable if and only if more than two-thirds
of the generals are loyal; so a single traitor can confound two loyal
generals. With unforgeable written messages, the problem is solvable for
any number of generals and possible traitors. Applications of the solutions
to reliable computer systems are then discussed.

The paper is mostly focused on the formal proof, a bit of a
theme from Lamport, who developed TLA+17 to make formal
proving easier, but it’s also a useful reminder that we still tend

to assume our components will behave reliably and honestly,
and perhaps we shouldn’t!
21. “Out of the Tar Pit”
“Out of the Tar Pit” bemoans unnecessary complexity in
software, and proposes that functional programming and
better data modeling can help us reduce accidental
complexity. (The authors argue that most unnecessary
complexity comes from state.)
From the abstract:
Complexity is the single major difficulty in the successful development of
large-scale software systems. Following Brooks we distinguish accidental
from essential difficulty, but disagree with his premise that most
complexity remaining in contemporary systems is essential. We identify
common causes of complexity and discuss general approaches which can
be taken to eliminate them where they are accidental in nature. To make
things more concrete we then give an outline for a potential complexityminimizing approach based on functional programming and Codd’s
relational model of data.

The paper’s certainly a good read, although reading it a
decade later, it’s fascinating to see that neither of those
approaches have particularly taken off. Instead the closest
“universal” approach to reducing complexity seems to be the
move to numerous mostly stateless services. This is perhaps
more a reduction of local complexity, at the expense of larger
systemic complexity, whose maintenance is then delegated to
more specialized systems engineers.
(This is yet another paper that makes me wish TLA+ felt
natural enough to be a commonly adopted tool.)

22. “The Chubby Lock Service for Loosely-Coupled Distributed
Systems”
Distributed systems are hard enough without having to
frequently reimplement Paxos or Raft. The model proposed by
Chubby is to implement consensus once in a shared service,
which will allow systems built upon it to share in the resilience
of distribution by following greatly simplified patterns.
From the abstract:
We describe our experiences with the Chubby lock service, which is
intended to provide coarse-grained locking as well as reliable (though lowvolume) storage for a loosely-coupled distributed system. Chubby
provides an interface much like a distributed file system with advisory
locks, but the design emphasis is on availability and reliability, as opposed
to high performance. Many instances of the service have been used for
over a year, with several of them each handling a few tens of thousands of
clients concurrently. The paper describes the initial design and expected
use, compares it with actual use, and explains how the design had to be
modified to accommodate the differences.

In the open source world, the way Zookeeper is used in
projects like Kafka and Mesos has the same role as Chubby.
23. “Bigtable: A Distributed Storage System for Structured
Data”
One of Google’s preeminent papers and technologies is
Bigtable, which was an early (early in the internet era, anyway)
NoSQL data store, operating at extremely high scale and built
on top of Chubby.
Bigtable is a distributed storage system for managing structured data that
is designed to scale to a very large size: petabytes of data across
thousands of commodity servers. Many projects at Google store data in

Bigtable, including web indexing, Google Earth, and Google Finance.
These applications place very different demands on Bigtable, both in terms
of data size (from URLs to web pages to satellite imagery) and latency
requirements (from backend bulk processing to real-time data serving).
Despite these varied demands, Bigtable has successfully provided a
flexible, high-performance solution for all of these Google products. In this
paper we describe the simple data model provided by Bigtable, which gives
clients dynamic control over data layout and format, and we describe the
design and implementation of Bigtable.

From the SSTable design to the bloom filters, Cassandra
inherits significantly from the Bigtable paper, and is probably
rightfully considered a merging of the Dynamo and Bigtable
papers.
24. “Spanner: Google’s Globally-Distributed Database”
Many early NoSQL storage systems traded eventual
consistency for increased resiliency, but building on top of
eventually consistent systems can be harrowing. Spanner
represents an approach from Google to offering both strong
consistency and distributed reliability, based in part on a novel
approach to managing time.
Spanner is Google’s scalable, multi-version, globally distributed, and
synchronously-replicated database. It is the first system to distribute data
at global scale and support externally-consistent distributed transactions.
This paper describes how Spanner is structured, its feature set, the
rationale underlying various design decisions, and a novel time API that
exposes clock uncertainty. This API and its implementation are critical to
supporting external consistency and a variety of powerful features:
nonblocking reads in the past, lock-free read-only transactions, and
atomic schema changes, across all of Spanner.

We haven’t seen any open source Spanner equivalents yet, but
I imagine we’ll start seeing them soon.

25. “Security Keys: Practical Cryptographic Second Factors for
the Modern Web”
Security keys like the YubiKey18 have emerged as the most
secure second authentication factor, and this paper out of
Google explains the motivations that led to their creation, as
well as the design that makes them work.
From the abstract:
Security Keys are second-factor devices that protect users against
phishing and man-in-the-middle attacks. Users carry a single device and
can self-register it with any online service that supports the protocol. The
devices are simple to implement and deploy, simple to use, privacy
preserving, and secure against strong attackers. We have shipped support
for Security Keys in the Chrome web browser and in Google’s online
services. We show that Security Keys lead to both an increased level of
security and user satisfaction by analyzing a two-year deployment which
began within Google and has extended to our consumer-facing web
applications. The Security Key design has been standardized by the FIDO
Alliance, an organization with more than 250 member companies spanning
the industry. Currently, Security Keys have been deployed by Google,
Dropbox, and GitHub.

These keys are also remarkably cheap! Order a few and start
securing your life in a day or two.
26. “BeyondCorp: Design to Deployment at Google”
Building on the original BeyondCorp paper,19 which was
published in 2014, this paper is slightly more detailed and
benefits from two more years of migration-fueled wisdom.
That said, the big ideas have remained fairly consistent, and
there is not much new relative to the BeyondCorp paper itself.

If you haven’t read that fantastic paper, this is an equally good
starting point:
The goal of Google’s BeyondCorp initiative is to improve our security with
regard to how employees and devices access internal applications. Unlike
the conventional perimeter security model, BeyondCorp doesn’t gate
access to services and tools based on a user’s physical location or the
originating network; instead, access policies are based on information
about a device, its state, and its associated user. BeyondCorp considers
both internal networks and external networks to be completely untrusted,
and gates access to applications by dynamically asserting and enforcing
levels, or tiers, of access.

As is often the case when I read Google papers, my biggest
takeaway here is to wonder when we’ll start to see reusable,
pluggable open source versions of the techniques described
within.
27. “Availability in Globally Distributed Storage Systems”
This paper explores how to think about availability in
replicated distributed systems, and is a useful starting point
for those of us who are trying to determine the correct way to
measure uptime for our storage layer or for any other
sufficiently complex system.
From the abstract:
We characterize the availability properties of cloud storage systems based
on an extensive one-year study of Google’s main storage infrastructure
and present statistical models that enable further insight into the impact of
multiple design choices, such as data placement and replication strategies.
With these models we compare data availability under a variety of system
parameters given the real patterns of failures observed in our fleet.

Particularly interesting is the focus on correlated failures,
building on the premise that users of distributed systems only
experience the failure when multiple components have
overlapping failures. Another expected but reassuring
observation is that at Google’s scale (and with resources
distributed across racks and regions), most failure comes from
tuning and system design, not from the underlying hardware.
I was also surprised by how simple their definition of
availability was in this case:
A storage node becomes unavailable when it fails to respond positively to
periodic health checking pings sent by our monitoring system. The node
remains unavailable until it regains responsiveness or the storage system
reconstructs the data from other surviving nodes.

Often, discussions of availability become arbitrarily complex
(“It should really be that response rates are over X, but with
correct results and within our latency SLO!”), and it’s
reassuring to see the simplest definitions are still usable.
28. “Still All on One Server: Perforce at Scale”
As a company grows, code hosting performance becomes one
of the critical factors in overall developer productivity (along
with build and test performance), but it’s a topic that isn’t
discussed frequently. This paper from Google discusses their
experience scaling Perforce:
Google runs the busiest single Perforce server on the planet, and one of the
largest repositories in any source control system. From this high-water
mark this paper looks at server performance and other issues of scale, with
digressions into where we are, how we got here, and how we continue to
stay one step ahead of our users.

This paper is particularly impressive when you consider the
difficulties that companies run into as they scale Git
monorepos (talk to an ex-Twitter employee near you for war
stories).
29. “Large-Scale Automated Refactoring Using ClangMR”
Large codebases tend to age poorly, especially in the case of
monorepos storing hundreds or thousands of different teams
collaborating on different projects.
This paper covers one of Google’s attempts to reduce the
burden of maintaining their large monorepo through tooling
that makes it easy to rewrite abstract syntax trees (ASTs)
across the entire codebase.
From the abstract:
In this paper, we present a real-world implementation of a system to
refactor large C++ codebases efficiently. A combination of the Clang
compiler framework and the MapReduce parallel processor, ClangMR
enables code maintainers to easily and correctly transform large
collections of code. We describe the motivation behind such a tool, its
implementation and then present our experiences using it in a recent API
update with Google’s C++ codebase.

Similar work is being done with Pivot.20
30. “Source Code Rejuvenation is not Refactoring”
This paper introduces the concept of “code rejuvenation,” a
unidirectional process of moving toward cleaner abstractions
as new language features and libraries become available,
which is particularly applicable to sprawling, older codebases.

From the abstract:
In this paper, we present the notion of source code rejuvenation, the
automated migration of legacy code and very briefly mention the tools we
use to achieve that. While refactoring improves structurally inadequate
source code, source code rejuvenation leverages enhanced program
language and library facilities by finding and replacing coding patterns that
can be expressed through higher-level software abstractions. Raising the
level of abstraction benefits software maintainability, security, and
performance.

There are some strong echoes of this work in Google’s
ClangMR paper.21
31. “Searching for Build Debt: Experiences Managing Technical
Debt at Google”
This paper is an interesting cover of how to perform largescale migrations in living codebases. Using broken builds as
the running example, they break down their strategy into three
pillars: automating, making it easy to do the right thing, and
making it hard to do the wrong thing.
From the abstract:
With a large and rapidly changing codebase, Google software engineers
are constantly paying interest on various forms of technical debt. Google
engineers also make efforts to pay down that debt, whether through
special Fixit days, or via dedicated teams, variously known as janitors,
cultivators, or demolition experts. We describe several related efforts to
measure and pay down technical debt found in Google’s BUILD files and
associated dead code. We address debt found in dependency
specifications, unbuildable targets, and unnecessary command line flags.
These efforts often expose other forms of technical debt that must first be
managed.

32. “No Silver Bullet—Essence and Accident in Software
Engineering”
A seminal paper from the author of The Mythical Man-Month,
“No Silver Bullet” expands on discussions of accidental versus
essential complexity, and argues that there is no longer
enough accidental complexity to allow individual reductions in
that accidental complexity to significantly increase engineer
productivity.
From the abstract:
Most of the big past gains in software productivity have come from
removing artificial barriers that have made the accidental tasks
inordinately hard, such as severe hardware constraints, awkward
programming languages, lack of machine time. How much of what software
engineers now do is still devoted to the accidental, as opposed to the
essential? Unless it is more than 9/10 of all effort, shrinking all the
accidental activities to zero time will not give an order of magnitude
improvement.

I think that, interestingly, we do see accidental complexity in
large codebases become large enough to make order-ofmagnitude improvements (motivating, for example, Google’s
investments in ClangMR and such), so perhaps we’re not quite
as far ahead in the shift to essential complexity as we’d like to
believe.
33. “The UNIX Time-Sharing System”
This paper describes the fundamentals of UNIX as of 1974.
What is truly remarkable is how many of the design decisions
are still used today. From the permission model that we’ve all

manipulated with chmod to system calls used to manipulate
files, it’s amazing how much remains intact.
From the abstract:
UNIX is a general-purpose, multi-user, interactive operating system for the
Digital Equipment Corporation PDP-11/40 and 11/45 computers. It offers a
number of features seldom found even in larger operating systems,
including: (1) a hierarchical file system incorporating demountable
volumes; (2) compatible file, device, and interprocess I/O; (3) the ability to
initiate asynchronous processes; (4) system command language
selectable on a per-user basis; and (5) over 100 subsystems including a
dozen languages. This paper discusses the nature and implementation of
the file system and of the user command interface.

Also fascinating is their observation that UNIX has in part
succeeded because it was designed to solve a general problem
by its authors (working with the PDP-7 was frustrating), rather
than to progress toward a more specified goal.

Endnotes

Chapter 2: Organizations

1.

https://lethain.com/running-an-engineering-reorg/

2.

https://lethain.com/strategies-visions/

3.

https://lethain.com/guiding-broad-change-with-metrics/

4. https://increment.com/on-call/

5.

https://lethain.com/durably-excellent-teams/

6.

https://lethain.com/running-an-engineering-reorg/

7.

http://www.askmar.com/BusinessPlan/2006-1118YahooPeanutButterManifesto.pdf

8. https://lethain.com/durably-excellent-teams/

9.

https://lethain.com/durably-excellent-teams/

10. https://www.amazon.com/dp/B002LHRM2O

11. https://www.amazon.com/Thinking-Systems-Donella-HMeadows/dp/1603580557

12. https://hbr.org/2008/04/managing-hypergrowth

13. http://fortune.com/2015/03/15/bill-gurley-predicts-deadunicorns-in-startup-land-this-year/

14. https://www.amazon.com/Mythical-Man-Month-SoftwareEngineering-Anniversary/dp/0201835959

15. https://www.amazon.com/dp/B00AZRBLHO/

16. https://lethain.com/tools-for-operating-a-growing-org/

17. https://lethain.com/identify-your-controls/

18. https://lethain.com/productivity-in-the-age-ofhypergrowth/

Chapter 3: Tools

1.

https://lethain.com/building-technical-leverage/

2.

https://lethain.com/intro-product-management/

3.

https://www.amazon.com/Thinking-Systems-Donella-HMeadows/dp/1603580557

4. https://lethain.com/accelerate-developer-productivity/

5.

https://www.iseesystems.com/

6.

https://insightmaker.com/

7.

https://lethain.com/durably-excellent-teams/

8. https://lethain.com/product-management-infraengineering/

9.

https://www.amazon.com/dp/B004W3FM4A/ref=dpkindle-redirect?_encoding=UTF8andbtkr=1

10. https://lethain.com/building-technical-leverage/

11. https://lethain.com/migrations/

12. https://lethain.com/migrations/

13. https://lethain.com/good-strategy-bad-strategy/

14. https://www.amazon.com/dp/B004J4WKEC/ref=dpkindle-redirect?_encoding=UTF8andbtkr=1

15. https://lethain.com/guiding-broad-change-with-metrics/

16. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Service-level_objective

17. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/OKR

18. https://lethain.com/goals-and-baselines/

19. https://stripe.com/blog/aws-reserved-instances

20. https://lethain.com/goals-and-baselines/

21. https://www.amazon.com/dp/B00A5DCALY/

22. https://lethain.com/productivity-in-the-age-ofhypergrowth/

23. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/You_aren%27t_gonna_need_it

24. https://lethain.com/refactoring-programmatically/

25. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lint_(software)

26. https://lethain.com/goals-and-baselines/

27. https://lethain.com/strategies-visions/

28. https://lethain.com/strategies-visions/

29. https://lethain.com/roles-over-rocket-ships/

30. https://lethain.com/partnering-with-your-manager/

31. https://lethain.com/digg-v4-architecture-process/

32. https://www.amazon.com/ALL-NEW-Dont-ThinkElephant/dp/160358594X/

33. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kanban

34. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lint_(software)

35. https://lethain.com/selecting-project-leads/

36. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Yahoo!_Search_BOSS

37. http://lucene.apache.org/solr/

38. https://lethain.com/guiding-broad-change-with-metrics/

39. https://lethain.com/strategies-visions/

40. https://lethain.com/building-technical-leverage/

41. https://lethain.com/close-out-solve-or-delegate/

42. https://lethain.com/organizational-risk/

43. https://lethain.com/tools-for-operating-a-growing-org/

44. https://www.amazon.com/dp/B000RO9VJK/ref=dpkindle-redirect?_encoding=UTF8andbtkr=1

45. https://lethain.com/first-team/

46. https://lethain.com/hosting-paper-reading-group/

Chapter 4: Approaches

1.

https://lethain.com/strategies-visions/

2.

https://www.amazon.com/Phoenix-Project-DevOpsHelping-Business/dp/0988262592

3.

https://lethain.com/case-against-top-down-global-

optimization/

4. https://lethain.com/productivity-in-the-age-ofhypergrowth/

5.

https://lethain.com/infrastructure-between-cost-centerand-before-ego-trip/

6.

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Golden_Rule

7.

https://medium.com/@evnowandforever/f-you-i-quithiring-is-broken-bb8f3a48d324

8. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dialectic#Hegelian_dialectic

9.

https://lethain.com/adding-value-as-an-engineeringmanager/

10. https://lethain.com/ways-engineering-managers-getstuck/

11. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Good_Earth

12. https://lethain.com/ways-engineering-managers-getstuck/

13. https://www.amazon.com/Getting-Right-TaoContemporary-Ching/dp/0982473982

14. https://lethain.com/some-of-my-favorite-technicalpapers/

15. https://lethain.com/good-strategy-bad-strategy/

16. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sensitivity_analysis

Chapter 5: Culture

1.

https://lethain.com/selecting-project-leads/

2.

https://lethain.com/selecting-project-leads/

3.

https://lethain.com/hosting-paper-reading-group/

4. https://www.donut.com/

5.

https://lethain.com/sizing-engineering-teams/

6.

https://www.attack-gecko.net/2018/06/25/building-afirst-team-mindset/

7.

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rooney_Rule

8. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Me_and_Bobby_McGee

9.

http://classics.mit.edu/Plato/apology.html

10. https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/liberty-positivenegative/

11. https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/liberty-positivenegative/#ParPosLib

12. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/System_dynamics

13. https://www.amazon.com/Slack-Getting-BurnoutBusywork-Efficiency/dp/0767907698

14. https://a16z.com/2014/02/06/6147/

15. https://www.amazon.com/Innovators-DilemmaRevolutionary-Change-Business/dp/0062060244

16. https://www.amazon.com/Thinking-Systems-Donella-HMeadows/dp/1603580557/

17. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dust_Bowl

18. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Foundation_series

Chapter 6: Careers

1.

https://www.wired.com/story/surviving-as-an-old-in-thetech-world/

2.

https://blog.wealthfront.com/how-long-should-you-stayat-your-job/

3.

https://www.linkedin.com/in/will-larson-a44b543/

4. http://randsinrepose.com/archives/wanted/

5.

https://www.comparably.com/blog/best-places-to-workcompetition/

6.

https://www.lever.co/

7.

http://www.greenhouse.io/

8. https://lethain.com/membership-opportunity/

9.

https://lethain.com/membership-opportunity/

10. https://jvns.ca/blog/2017/12/31/2017--year-in-review/

11. https://lethain.com/first-team/

12. https://www.businessinsider.com/stack-rankingemployees-is-a-bad-idea-2013-11

13. https://www.amazon.com/Work-Rules-Insights-InsideTransform-ebook/dp/B00MEMMVB8

14. https://lethain.com/skew-the-frontend-engineer-smisery/

15. https://lethain.com/hiring-funnel/

16. https://lethain.com/perf-management-system/

17. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Site_Reliability_Engineering

18. https://lethain.com/running-an-engineering-reorg/

19. https://lethain.com/career-levels-and-more/

20. https://lethain.com/perf-management-system/

21. https://lethain.com/hiring-funnel/

22. https://www.amazon.com/Cracking-Coding-InterviewProgramming-Questions/dp/098478280X

23. https://lethain.com/hiring-funnel/

24. https://lethain.com/perf-management-system/

25. https://lethain.com/perf-management-system/

Chapter 7: Appendix

1.

https://twitter.com/davinbogan

2.

https://lethain.com/hosting-paper-reading-group/

3.

https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Butler_Lampson

4. https://12factor.net

5.

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CAP_theorem

6.

https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/Harvest%2CYield-and-Scalable-Tolerant-Systems-FoxBrewer/50158bc1a8a67295ab7bce0550886a9859000dc2

7.

https://zipkin.io/

8. https://opentracing.io/

9.

http://kafka.apache.org/

10. http://catb.org/jargon/html/S/second-system-effect.html

11. https://www.jwz.org/doc/worse-is-better.html

12. http://mesos.apache.org/

13. https://medium.com/netflix-techblog/prana-a-sidecarfor-your-netflix-paas-based-applications-and-services258a5790a015

14. https://github.com/etcd-io/etcd

15. https://www.influxdata.com/

16. https://zookeeper.apache.org/

17. https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/TLA%2B

18. https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/YubiKey

19. https://www.usenix.org/system/files/login/articles/login_dec14_02_wa

20. https://parasol.tamu.edu/pivot/

21. https://ai.google/research/pubs/pub41342

Chapter 7: Appendix; Books I’ve found very useful

1.

https://www.amazon.com/Thinking-Systems-Donella-HMeadows/dp/1603580557/ref=sr_1_1?
keywords=Thinking+in+Systems%3A+A+Primer+by+Donella+Meadow
1

2.

https://www.amazon.com/ALL-NEW-Dont-ThinkElephant/dp/160358594X/ref=sr_1_fkmrnull_1?

keywords=Don’t+Think+of+an+Elephant%21+Know+Your+Values+and
1-fkmrnull

3.

https://www.amazon.com/Peopleware-ProductiveProjects-Teams-3rd/dp/0321934113/ref=sr_1_fkmrnull_1?
keywords=Peopleware%3A+Productive+Projects+and+Teams+by+DeM
1-fkmrnull

4. https://www.amazon.com/Slack-Getting-BurnoutBusywork-Efficiency/dp/0767907698/ref=sr_1_fkmrnull_1?
keywords=Slack%3A+Getting+Past+Burnout%2C+Busywork%2C+and+
1-fkmrnull

5.

https://www.amazon.com/Mythical-Man-Month-SoftwareEngineeringAnniversary/dp/0201835959/ref=sr_1_fkmrnull_1?
keywords=The+Mythical+Man-

Month+by+Frederick+Brooks&qid=1551585913&s=gateway&sr=81-fkmrnull

6.

https://www.amazon.com/Good-Strategy-Bad-DifferenceMatters-ebook/dp/B004J4WKEC/ref=sr_1_fkmrnull_1?
keywords=Good+Strategy+Bad+Strategy%3A+The+Difference+and+W
1-fkmrnull

7.

https://www.amazon.com/Goal-Process-OngoingImprovement/dp/0884271951/ref=sr_1_1?
keywords=The+Goal%3A+A+Process+of+Ongoing+Improvement+by+E
1

8. https://www.amazon.com/Five-Dysfunctions-TeamLeadership-Fable/dp/0787960756/ref=sr_1_1?
keywords=The+Five+Dysfunctions+of+a+Team+by+Patrick+Lencioni&
1

9.

https://www.amazon.com/Three-Signs-MiserableJob/dp/8126552697/ref=sr_1_fkmrnull_1?
keywords=The+Three+Signs+of+a+Miserable+Job+by+Patrick+Lencio
1-fkmrnull

10. https://www.amazon.com/Finite-Infinite-Games-JamesCarse/dp/1476731713/ref=sr_1_1?
keywords=Finite+and+Infinite+Games+by+James+Carse&qid=1551586
1

11. https://www.amazon.com/INSPIRED-Create-TechProducts-Customers/dp/1119387507/ref=sr_1_fkmrnull_1?
keywords=INSPIRED%3A+How+to+Create+Tech+Products+Customers
1-fkmrnull

12. https://www.amazon.com/Innovators-DilemmaTechnologies-ManagementInnovation/dp/1633691780/ref=sr_1_fkmrnull_1?
keywords=The+Innovator’s+Dilemma%3A+When+New+Technologies+
1-fkmrnull

13. https://www.amazon.com/Myth-Revisited-SmallBusinesses-Aboutebook/dp/B000RO9VJK/ref=sr_1_fkmrnull_1?
keywords=The+EMyth+Revisited%3A+Why+Most+Small+Businesses+Don’t+Work+and+
1-fkmrnull

14. https://www.amazon.com/Fierce-ConversationsAchieving-SuccessConversation/dp/B06XGNMDBY/ref=sr_1_fkmrnull_1?
keywords=Fierce+Conversations%3A+Achieving+Success+at+Work+an
1-fkmrnull

15. https://www.amazon.com/Becoming-Technical-LeaderProblem-solvingPaperback/dp/B00NPOCUKQ/ref=sr_1_fkmr0_1?
keywords=Becoming+a+Technical+Leader%3A+An+Organic+ProblemSolving+Approach+by+Gerald+Weinberg&qid=1551587007&s=books&
1-fkmr0

16. https://www.amazon.com/Designing-MindUnderstanding-InterfaceGuidelines/dp/0124079148/ref=sr_1_fkmrnull_1?
keywords=Designing+with+the+Mind+in+Mind+by+Jeff+Johnson&qid=
1-fkmrnull

17. https://www.amazon.com/Leadership-Pipeline-BuildPowered-Company/dp/0470894563/ref=sr_1_fkmrnull_1?
keywords=The+Leadership+Pipeline%3A+How+to+Build+the+Leaders
1-fkmrnull

18. https://www.amazon.com/Managers-Path-LeadersNavigating-Growth/dp/1491973897/ref=sr_1_fkmrnull_1?
keywords=The+Manager’s+Path%3A+A+Guide+for+Tech+Leaders+Na
1-fkmrnull

19. https://www.amazon.com/High-Output-ManagementAndrew-Grove/dp/0679762884/ref=sr_1_1?
keywords=High+Output+Management+by+Andy+Grove&qid=15515920
1

20. https://www.amazon.com/First-90-Days-StrategiesExpanded/dp/1422188612/ref=sr_1_fkmrnull_1?
keywords=The+First+90+Days%3A+Proven+Strategies+for+Getting+U
1-fkmrnull

21. https://www.amazon.com/Effective-Executive-DefinitiveHarperbusiness-Essentialsebook/dp/B01F1WZGNC/ref=sr_1_fkmrnull_1?
keywords=The+Effective+Executive%3A+The+Definitive+Guide+to+Ge
1-fkmrnull

22. https://www.amazon.com/Dont-Make-Me-ThinkUsability/dp/0321344758/ref=sr_1_fkmrnull_2?
keywords=Don’t+Make+Me+Think%3A+A+Common+Sense+Approach
2-fkmrnull

23. https://www.amazon.com/Deadline-Novel-About-ProjectManagement/dp/0932633390/ref=sr_1_fkmrnull_1?
keywords=The+Deadline%3A+A+Novel+About+Project+Management+
1-fkmrnull

24. https://www.amazon.com/Psychology-ComputerProgramming-SilverAnniversary/dp/0932633420/ref=sr_1_fkmrnull_1?
keywords=The+Psychology+of+Computer+Programming+by+Gerald+W
1-fkmrnull

25. https://www.amazon.com/Adrenaline-Junkies-TemplateZombies-Understandingebook/dp/B00DY3KQHM/ref=sr_1_fkmrnull_1?
keywords=Adrenaline+Junkies+and+Template+Zombies%3A+Underst
1-fkmrnull

26. https://www.amazon.com/Secrets-Consulting-GivingGetting-Successfullyebook/dp/B004J35LHQ/ref=sr_1_fkmrnull_1?
keywords=The+Secrets+of+Consulting%3A+A+Guide+to+Giving+and+
1-fkmrnull

27. https://www.amazon.com/Death-Meeting-LeadershipSolving-Business/dp/0787968056/ref=sr_1_1?
keywords=Death+by+Meeting+by+Patrick+Lencioni&qid=1551592514&
1

28. https://www.amazon.com/Advantage-OrganizationalHealth-EverythingBusiness/dp/B007MIWCAY/ref=sr_1_fkmrnull_1?
keywords=The+Advantage%3A+Why+Organizational+Health+Trumps+
1-fkmrnull

29. https://www.amazon.com/Rise-Practical-AdvancingCareer-Standing/dp/B0762349WT/ref=sr_1_1?
keywords=Rise%3A+3+Practical+Steps+for+Advancing+Your+Career%
1-catcorr

30. https://www.amazon.com/Innovators-Solution-CreatingSustaining-Successful/dp/B000MGTPY4/ref=sr_1_1?
keywords=The+Innovator’s+Solution%3A+Creating+and+Sustaining+S
1-catcorr

31. https://www.amazon.com/Phoenix-Project-HelpingBusiness-Anniversary/dp/B00VATFAMI/ref=sr_1_1?
keywords=The+Phoenix+Project%3A+A+Novel+about+IT%2C+DevOps
1-catcorr

32. https://www.amazon.com/Nicole-Forsgren-AccelerateOrganizations-2018/dp/B07J63DQB2/ref=sr_1_fkmr0_2?
keywords=Accelerate%3A+The+Science+of+Lean+Software+and+Dev
2-fkmr0

Chapter 7: Appendix; Papers I’ve found very useful

1.

https://www.allthingsdistributed.com/files/amazondynamo-sosp2007.pdf

2.

https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/wpcontent/uploads/2016/02/acrobat-17.pdf

3.

https://www.researchgate.net/publication/2938621_Big_Ball_of_Mud

4. https://static.googleusercontent.com/media/research.google.com/en/
sosp2003.pdf

5.

http://highscalability.com/paper-designing-anddeploying-internet-scale-services

6.

https://www.researchgate.net/publication/220476881_CAP_Twelve_ye

7.

http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?
doi=10.1.1.8.671&rep=rep1&type=pdf

8. https://static.googleusercontent.com/media/research.google.com/en/
osdi04.pdf

9.

https://static.googleusercontent.com/media/research.google.com/en/
2010-1.pdf

10. http://notes.stephenholiday.com/Kafka.pdf

11. https://www.usenix.org/system/files/conference/nsdi15/nsdi15paper-sharma.pdf

12. https://static.googleusercontent.com/media/research.google.com/en/

13. https://pdos.csail.mit.edu/6.824/papers/borg.pdf

14. https://static.googleusercontent.com/media/research.google.com/en/

15. https://people.eecs.berkeley.edu/~alig/papers/mesos.pdf

16. https://static.googleusercontent.com/media/research.google.com/en/

17. https://raft.github.io/raft.pdf

18. https://lamport.azurewebsites.net/pubs/paxos-simple.pdf

19. https://www.cs.cornell.edu/projects/Quicksilver/public_pdfs/SWIM.pd

20. https://people.eecs.berkeley.edu/~luca/cs174/byzantine.pdf

21. https://github.com/papers-we-love/papers-welove/blob/master/design/out-of-the-tar-pit.pdf

22. https://static.googleusercontent.com/media/research.google.com/en/
osdi06.pdf

23. https://static.googleusercontent.com/media/research.google.com/en/
osdi06.pdf

24. https://static.googleusercontent.com/media/research.google.com/en/
osdi2012.pdf

25. https://ai.google/research/pubs/pub45409

26. https://ai.google/research/pubs/pub44860

27. https://static.googleusercontent.com/media/research.google.com/en/

28. http://info.perforce.com/rs/perforce/images/GoogleWhitePaperStillAllonOneServer-PerforceatScale.pdf

29. https://ai.google/research/pubs/pub41342

30. http://www.stroustrup.com/sofsem10.pdf

31. https://static.googleusercontent.com/media/research.google.com/en/

32. http://worrydream.com/refs/Brooks-NoSilverBullet.pdf

33. https://people.eecs.berkeley.edu/~brewer/cs262/unix.pdf

